
2008학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지

제 3 교시       외국어(영어) 영역
 

성명


수험번호





3




          

◦먼저 문제지에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 기입하시오.
◦답안지에 수험 번호 및 답을 표기할 때는 반드시 ‘수험생이 지켜야 할 일’에 따라 표기하시오.
◦문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을 참고하시오. 1점과 3점 문항에만 점수가 표시되어 있습니다. 점수 표시가 없는 문항은 모두 2점씩입니다.


1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 물건을 고르시오.

 ①
 ②
 ③



 ④
 ⑤






2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① curious → indifferent	② excited → grateful
③ worried → confident	④ relieved → excited
⑤ anxious → frustrated

3. 다음을 듣고, 의인화된 ‘I’가 무엇인지 고르시오.
① straw	② paper	③ mouse
④ thumb	⑤ eye

4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to email his family
② to cook him pasta
③ to take his photos 
④ to order Italian food
⑤ to take him out for dinner

5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 오늘 지출한 총액을 고르시오.
① $120 	② $130	③ $140
④ $150	⑤ $160
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 동아리 회원을 모집하려고
② 학교 환경 개선을 요구하려고
③ 학생회 정기 총회를 안내하려고
④ 해양 생태계의 중요성을 강조하려고
⑤ 봉사활동 소감 발표회를 홍보하려고

7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① 우편물 찾아오기	② 결혼 선물 함께 고르기 
③ 결혼 사진 촬영하기	④ 골동품 전시회 함께 가기
⑤ 골동품 전문가 소개하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① lawyer and client
② doctor and patient
③ coach and athlete
④ manager and salesclerk 
⑤ interviewer and interviewee

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① restaurant	② classroom
③ art museum	④ concert hall
⑤ photo studio

10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① 접수 상황 확인하기	② 준비물 알려주기
③ 예약 사항 변경하기	④ 팩스 사용법 알려주기 
⑤ 일정표 보내주기 

11. 오디션에 대한 다음 안내 방송을 듣고, 메모한 내용 중 잘못된  것을 고르시오.
   
①
②
③
④
⑤

12. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 옷에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 순면 제품이다. 
② 지퍼가 달려 있다.
③ 세탁기 사용이 가능하다.
④ 뒤집어 다려야 한다.
⑤ 평평하게 펴서 말려야 한다. 

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
       
① 	②	③	④	⑤


14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:                                                      

① You should have kept the promise.
② How about buying her a different gift?
③ I’d better send a thank-you note to Judy.
④ Would you show me a cheaper one?
⑤ She’ll be glad if she can afford it.


15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:                                                    

① Jim is a more experienced fighter. 
② The champ’s a born fighter. He’ll win. 
③ Jim’s condition is not very good nowadays.
④ I agree with you. He has some weaknesses.
⑤ The champ’s too old to take Jim’s strong punches. 

16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:                                                      

① Great. I’m happy to leave home.
② Don’t worry. That’s part of growing up.
③ Well, don’t forget to turn it in next time.
④ Okay. I’ll meet you at the school cafeteria.
⑤ Remember, eating breakfast is good for health.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Charlie가 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Charlie:                                                      

① I think I returned it last Monday. 
② Well, I’m sure that’s what I’m called.
③ I’m interested in history and literature.
④ Finally, I’ve grown up to love my brother.
⑤ Okay, that’s the book my teacher talked about.








이제 듣기 ․ 말하기 문제는 다 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
This is one of the most important inventions in human history. Civilization could exist only in warm climates where horses could stay alive through the winter by grazing. Without grass in winter you could not have horses, and without horses you could not have urban civilization. Some time during the so-called Dark Ages, some unknown genius found out how to make this. Forests were turned into meadows. Grass was cut, made into this, and stored. Horses fed on this. Civilization could move north over the Alps. So this gave birth to Vienna and Paris and London and Berlin, and later to Moscow and New York. 
① hay 	② cheese 
③ wheel	④ horseshoe
⑤ greenhouse





19. 밑줄 친 they[their]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? 
Brown bears are found in Alaska and western Canada. They are not only surprisingly fast, but also, for such huge beasts, amazingly agile; ①they can climb up and down nearly vertical inclines. Fishing the streams in summer, they pounce on swift-moving salmon and snatch them with almost simultaneous movements of ②their paws and mouths. Being excellent swimmers, ③they love to play in the water on warm days. In general, ④they show a fear of humans, but Alaskans prefer not to test these creatures and usually carry noisemakers of some kind to warn the bears of ⑤their presence. 
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
For eight years, Asian Ethnic Festival has been proud to share the cultures of over twelve Asian ethnic groups at Freedom Festival Park. In 2007 many of our core members retired, moved from the area, and in several cases, found new jobs that place heavy demands on their time. By the end of last year we realized that without the participation of these key people, holding the event would be difficult if not impossible. At the beginning of 2008 we made the difficult decision not to hold Asian Ethnic Festival this summer. We are hopeful that we can return in 2009. We encourage you to check back with our website in the near future for announcements regarding our festival.
① 행사 취소를 알리려고
② 예산 지원을 요청하려고
③ 자원 봉사자를 모집하려고
④ 축제 프로그램을 안내하려고
⑤ 회의 참석 여부를 확인하려고



21. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
The story of Athena becoming patron goddess of Athens concerns the struggle between the goddess and Poseidon. ①When the city of Athens was first built, both Poseidon and Athena competed for the honor of naming it. ②It was then agreed that whoever offered the most useful object for the people would become the patron of the city. ③Poseidon struck the ground with his trident and produced a horse, whereas Athena presented an olive tree, a symbol of peace and plenty. ④Athens became one of the world’s most important cities that exported olive oil. ⑤As the horse represented struggle and sorrow, the city was named after Athena.
*trident 삼지창(三枝槍)


22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Nowadays the growth of various social network sites, such as E-World and Face-Space, ①is impressive. They are ranked the fourth and fifth most popular site respectively just behind A-Tube. More than sixty percent of their users post their personal photos, as many as two million pictures a day, ②making E-World the top photo website in the country. But ③what many users may not realize is that the company owns every photo. In fact, everything that people post ④being automatically licensed to E-World for its transferable use, distribution, or public display. Recently E-World sold all “user content” ⑤posted on the site to other commercial businesses. Many users unknowingly handed over their photos to corporate control.
23. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Emma was very fond of singing. She had a very good voice, except that some of her high notes tended to sound like a gate which someone had forgotten (A)
oiling / to oil
. Emma was very conscious of this weakness and took every opportunity she could find to practice these high notes. As she lived in a small house, (B)
where / which
 she could not practice without disturbing the rest of the family, she usually practiced her high notes outside. One afternoon, a car passed her while she was singing some of her highest and most difficult notes. She saw an anxious expression suddenly (C)
come / to come
 over the driver’s face. He put his brakes on violently, jumped out, and began to examine all his tires carefully.
　    (A)         (B)         (C)
① oiling  ……  where  ……  come
② oiling  ……  which  ……  to come
③ oiling  ……  where  ……  to come
④ to oil  ……  which  ……  come
⑤ to oil  ……  where  ……  come





24. 다음 그림에 대한 설명 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? 
 
Radio waves travel in ①straight lines. As in Figure 1, some waves go along the ground, but they cannot be used over long distances because of the curve of the earth. Other waves ②shoot upward until they hit a band of the atmosphere called the ionosphere as in Figure 2. From the ionosphere they rebound to the earth. They can ③bounce up and down between the earth and the ionosphere all the way round the earth. But not all radio waves are blocked by the ionosphere. In Figure 3, some very short waves such as those used for television go straight through and ④disappear into space. If we want to send television pictures across the Atlantic, we should get a special satellite to ⑤remove them.
*ionosphere 전리층
25. Rembrandt에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
No discussion of baroque painting is complete without mention of Rembrandt van Rijn (1606-1669), perhaps the greatest Dutch painter of all time. His paintings are usually filled with gold tones and warm browns. By contrasting light and dark, he created subtle moods on canvas. His portraits reveal a psychological insight into man’s inner nature: many of his subjects he portrayed are deep in contemplation. The themes of many of Rembrandt’s paintings were inspired by stories in the Bible. Early in his career, he looked to the Bible only as a source for ideas. In his later religious work, however, he attempted to give a visual interpretation of the Bible. He sought to convey a message rather than simply to please his patrons.
① 바로크 회화의 거장이다.
② 명암의 대비로 섬세한 분위기를 표현했다.
③ 사색에 잠긴 인물을 많이 그렸다.
④ 후기에는 종교와 무관한 그림을 그렸다.
⑤ 주문자의 요구에 얽매이지 않았다.


【26-29】다음 글의 빈 칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
26. Any skier can tell you what good snow is, but when you’re out shoveling your driveway in the winter, you may feel hard-pressed to find any good words for the white nuisance. Actually, in cold climates, snow is far more useful than even most skiers might imagine. When snow covers the ground, it’s an excellent insulator against the colder air above. The snow protects plants and animals that can survive under the snow at temperatures slightly below freezing but would die in the outside air. So if you live in a cold climate, try to remember this winter as you’re out shoveling that you’re working with nature’s own            .
① blanket	② cleaner	③ mirror	
④ thermometer	⑤ weapon

27. Sarah came running in. “Look what I found.” Over the top of the paper I was reading came a crispy long object that caused me to jump. It was a snake skin that had been shed by one of our many garden snakes. “Isn’t it beautiful?” said my wide-eyed seven-year-old. I stared at the skin and thought to myself that it really wasn’t that beautiful, but I have learned never to           . Everything they see for the first time is elementary to their sense of beauty and creativity; they see only merit and excellence in the world until they are educated otherwise. “Beautiful overalls! Now we have a naked snake in our garden,” I answered.
① touch dead animals	 ② tell lies to other people	
③ exaggerate what you see	 ④ ignore what children say
⑤ give children too much money
28. Radio DJs use tricks to keep their listeners tuned in. Here’s one called a cliff-hanger. To make sure listeners won’t switch stations during the radio commercial, the broadcaster throws out a mini-mystery: “And right after the commercial we’ll be back with the winning ticket... It could be yours... Stay tuned!” When you leave a voice mail message, try to include a cliff-hanger: “Hi, Harry, this is Andrew. I have the answer to that question you asked me last week,” or “Hi, Diane, this is Andrew. I have some big news about that project we were discussing.” Now Harry and Diane have a reason to                 .
① call you back	② go out together
③ turn off the radio	④ change the ring tone
⑤ run an advertisement


29. In a traditional theory, the poorer countries could catch up quickly because in those countries,             . For instance, a few roads in a poor country can open a whole new area for trade; in a rich country, a few more roads just relieve a little congestion. A little more education in a poor country can make all the difference; in a rich country, people with degrees often can’t find a job. And of course, it should be easier to copy technology than for a rich country to invent it. When you look at some developing countries in the world, the theory of catch-up seems reasonable.
*congestion 혼잡
① public transportation is well organized
② new investments have far bigger rewards
③ they are free from corruption and instability
④ people work hard to break the chain of poverty
⑤ wages are relatively lower than in rich countries


30. 필자의 주장과 가까운 자녀 양육 사례로 가장 적절한 것은?
Nowadays many parents try to remove pain and failure from their children’s lives. “No, you can’t hang upside down on the monkey bars. You’ll fall,” and “Don’t worry. Everyone gets a trophy.” These are the ideas that guide their children’s lives. They try to eliminate risk even at the expense of fun and experience. The result is a group of kids who graduate from high school and are afraid to take the risks required to succeed because there is a high possibility of failure. Childhood is the time to be cut and scraped and to make mistakes. In childhood you learn how to handle obstacles and adversity for your later life.
① 배낭여행을 원하면 보내 준다.
② 사용한 물건을 스스로 치우게 한다.
③ 자전거를 탈 때는 헬멧을 쓰게 한다.
④ 좋아하는 가수의 공연에 함께 가 준다.
⑤ 연령에 맞는 TV 프로그램을 시청하게 한다.
【31-32】다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
31. In the early days of the car industry, Ford points out, there was no after-sales service. Car makers were totally focused on selling rather than building a relationship with customers, and it was considered good business to charge a lot for spare parts because the owner had no choice but to buy them. Ford believed that the sale of a car was merely the beginning of a relationship with a buyer. He built his cars to last, but also made sure that parts were interchangeable among models, cheap, and easy to install. This ideal of service might have seemed crazy to other manufacturers, but the trust it built up among the public was priceless. [1점]
① 기업의 위기관리 방법	② 자동차 정비의 필요성
③ 자동차 소비 형태의 변화	④ 바람직한 노사 관계의 정립
⑤ 애프터서비스 개념의 도입


32. Even though we are now living in the digital age, the basic and most important element of education―the human connection―has not changed. The most wired students still need that one-on-one, teacher-student relationship to learn and to succeed. Teenagers need instruction in English, math, or history, but they also want personal advice and encouragement. In my English and journalism classes, we talk about Shakespeare and persuasive essays, but we also discuss college basketball, the war in Iraq, and career choices. This personal connection is the vital link between teacher and student that no amount of technology can replace.
*wired 인터넷을 애용하는
① the personal ties between teachers and students
② the means to improve the school environment
③ the roles of technology in education
④ the methods of writing good essays
⑤ the disadvantages of e-learning 


33. 삼나무(redwood)에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The giant redwood in California is described as “the tree with the moving foot.” These trees, which are among the largest and oldest of all living things, moved to California from the Arctic. The warmer climate drew them southward and it took some seventy-five million years to complete the move. Carried by birds, winds, and some strong-toothed animals, the seeds of the redwood traveled thousands of miles from what is now the northernmost tip of Alaska to California. Only the hardest of seeds survived―those that visited Europe soon died out. But the seeds that made it to California put down roots, grew into luxuriant forests, and became camera subjects for tourists.
① 캘리포니아에서 여러 지역으로 전파되었다.
② 추운 지역에 주로 분포한다.
③ 동물로 인해 많은 해를 입고 있다.
④ 유럽에서는 살아남는 데 실패했다.
⑤ 관광객의 접근이 제한되어 있다.
 

34. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
More than one and a half million tickets have already been sold for the Olympic Games in Beijing this August. Many have been bought by (A)
generous / genuine
 sports fans. But others have not. Some ticket holders are already selling off their seats on the black market for inflated prices. A ticket for the opening ceremony that originally cost less than $400 is now on sale for more than $4,000. This is not supposed to be happening. Olympic rules say people can (B)
transfer / transform
 a ticket to somebody else, but not for financial gain. Anyone caught faces a huge fine, but this has not (C)
encouraged / discouraged
 selling their seats openly on the Internet.
      (A)	            (B)				      (C)
① generous	……  transfer	  ……  encouraged
② genuine	……  transform	  ……  discouraged
③ genuine	……  transfer	  ……  discouraged
④ genuine	……  transfer	  ……  encouraged
⑤ generous	……  transform	  ……  encouraged


35. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

Suppose you’re all sitting around the living room and someone is telling a joke. Suddenly, just before his big punch line, the phone rings.

(A) Here’s where you come in. Rescue him by just saying, “Now please get back to your story.” Doing subtle favors pays you back forever.

(B) Once the subject is changed, it’s hard for him to say, “Now, as I was saying...” Instead, he’ll spend the rest of the evening feeling miserable he didn’t get to finish.

(C) After the call, the subject turns to the impending marriage or medical operation of the caller. Nobody remembers the great punch line was not finished―except the joke teller.
*punch line (농담 등에서) 결정적인 대목
① (A)-(C)-(B) 		② (B)-(A)-(C) 	
③ (B)-(C)-(A)		④ (C)-(A)-(B)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)
36. 다음 글에 드러난 필자의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
The noise of the train filled the air now. The bridge began to shake as the train charged across it. I was on the narrow walkway on one side of the tracks. It was so narrow that the wind of a passing train would blow me off the bridge. My legs felt like water. My mouth opened by itself. I couldn’t move. Far in front I could see my friends screaming, “Run!” I thought that I would be soon joining them. That thought unlocked my body. I jumped to my feet. My left foot almost slipped, but I recovered and ran on. When I was almost across, finally I jumped and landed onto the solid ground. And when the train passed completely, I felt a warm hand on my neck. It was Chris’s.
① disappointed → satisfied	② happy → worried 
③ frightened → relieved	④ calm → terrified
⑤ annoyed → sympathetic


【37-38】다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
37. Have you ever noticed how comfortable you feel walking into certain rooms? The chairs are arranged in a way that welcomes you as if saying, “Come right on in and sit on me.” Conversely, you enter other rooms where you must go around the tables and dressers before you finally find a free chair. Likewise, some people arrange their ‘body furniture,’ their arms and legs, to say, “Hey, come right on over and talk to me.” Yet other people’s ‘body furniture’ shouts, “Keep out! Approach at your own risk.” Some studies show that party goers are more comfortable approaching people who stand with an open body, arms uncrossed and hanging at their sides, legs slightly separated, and a slight smile on their faces.
① 좋은 친구는 심리적 안정감을 준다.
② 동선을 고려하여 방안의 가구를 배치해야 한다.
③ 접근을 수용하는 자세가 상대를 편안하게 한다.
④ 산만한 가구 배치는 스트레스를 유발한다. 
⑤ 진솔한 대화가 스트레스를 해소시킨다.


38. The only thing missing from the government’s plan to pump water out of the Yazoo Basin is the scary music that accompanies the return of the monster in the movie. Wetlands reduce flood peaks. Draining them to prevent floods is like eating ice cream to lose weight. Moreover, the plan would be an endless burden on taxpayers: nearly two hundred million dollars to build drain pumps and millions more every year thereafter for their operation and maintenance. The flooding problem can be addressed with minor flood control measures to protect houses and roads and reforestation of wetter areas, not with the giant pumps that drain our precious wetlands.
*basin (강의) 유역 분지
① 홍수 방지를 위한 예산을 늘려야 한다.
② 나무를 심어서 자연 재해를 막아야 한다.
③ 습지의 물을 빼는 사업을 하지 말아야 한다.
④ 저지대 주민들을 다른 곳으로 이주시켜야 한다.
⑤ 자연 보호 구역에서는 영화 촬영을 금지해야 한다.

39. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
 
The above graph shows the distribution of income among all U.S. and world families. ①The economic gap between the rich and the poor in the world is far more noticeable than in the United States. ②The richest 20 percent of the U.S. families received about half the national income; the richest 20 percent of global population, however, received four-fifths of world income. ③At the other extreme, the poorest 20 percent of U.S. population earned 4 percent of the national income; the poorest fifth of the world’s people struggled to survive on just 1 percent of the global income. ④The bottom 60 percent of the world’s people received 10 percent of the world’s income. ⑤On the other hand, the bottom 60 percent of U.S. population enjoyed more than half the national income.

40. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Music seems to be everywhere we go. We now expect to hear music in restaurants, doctor’s offices, airports, and so on. Furthermore, CD players, MP3 players, and other types of equipment are not very expensive, so they are affordable to many people.    (A)   , most people have some way of listening to music at home. Now, you probably think that this is a positive thing. But there are some negative effects of music being so easily available. For one thing, many people have become passive listeners to music. By this I mean music is something that is just there; people don’t really listen to it.     (B)   , fewer and fewer people play musical instruments for fun. There just aren’t many amateur musicians. People rely on the professionals to make the music instead.
        (A)                          (B)
① As a result	……	 In addition
② As a result	……	 On the other hand
③ Nevertheless	……	 Therefore
④ Nevertheless	……	 On the other hand 
⑤ Nevertheless	……	 In addition
41. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

As they get a little older, the same children start making more mistakes.

Parents are sometimes surprised when their children’s grammar starts getting worse. ( ① ) When young children begin using sentences, their grammar is reasonably correct. ( ② ) For example, a child who used the word “mice” might start saying “mouses,” even though she had never heard anyone else make that mistake. ( ③ ) If you see this pattern of mistakes in your own child, don’t worry. ( ④ ) Child development specialists say it’s actually a good sign. ( ⑤ ) By making these mistakes, children are showing a deeper understanding of grammar.

42. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
The race started at two o’clock, and by then there were quite a lot of people in the grandstands. The crowd around us cheered and waved flags as the cars went past, and the noise grew louder and louder. With the lack of commentary or a screen to watch, we had no way of knowing who was in the lead or what was happening in the race. Quite obviously the race is much easier to follow on television than on site, but that didn’t matter. The spectacle of crowds, noise, really extreme cars rushing by (and at least one car going off the track) more than made up for that.
① warm and relaxing	② tense and scary
③ sad and gloomy	④ dynamic and exciting 
⑤ romantic and nostalgic

【43-44】 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
43. The good news is that scientists have uncovered an animal  group that should thrive as global temperatures rise. The  bad news is that it is insects. According to a new research conducted by biologists at the University of Washington,  insects that have adapted to warmer climates also show higher rates of population growth. As global temperatures increase, increases in insect populations could have profound effects on public health, agriculture and conservation, and could even alter entire ecosystems. “Enhanced population growth rates for butterflies might be a good thing, but enhanced growth rates for mosquito populations are much more dubious,” said Melanie Frazier, lead author of the new research.
*dubious 수상한, 의심스러운
① Insects: New Resources
② More Insects, Worse Harvest
③ Warmer World: Insect Heaven
④ Climate Change at Full Speed
⑤ Global Warming: New Food Producer
44. The city council recently passed a bill that bans charity groups from providing food to homeless people in downtown parks. On April 4, the police arrested Eric Montanez, a 22-year-old volunteer, for handing bread and soups to hungry people. They said that they enacted the law in response to complaints from residents and businesses. They argued the presence of readily available food will bring more homeless people into their community, and that they’ll have to raise taxes to provide affordable housing and public assistance and shelters. But volunteers are criticizing the law, calling the measure inhumane. They say, “Food is a human right, not a commodity. They’re not trying to find a solution to why these people are out there.”
*enact (법을) 제정하다
① Is Feeding the Hungry a Crime?
② Can Volunteering Reduce Violence?
③ Is It Necessary to Control Food Prices?
④ Should Taxes Be Raised for Public Health?
⑤ Should Gatherings in the City Parks Be Banned?






45. 다음 글이 시사하는 바를 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

Late in 1953, a young Londoner was looking forward to the appearance of his first book. He was most dismayed when his publisher told him it would not be issued until January 1954. He would miss the Christmas sales, and he feared his book wouldn’t get attention. Deeply disappointed, he tried to have the date changed. His wise old publisher, however, told him that in a month like January, any book more than ordinarily interesting would be assured of good reviews, and its popularity would be guaranteed. And he was right. When the first novel by the then unknown Kingsley Amis was published in the early days of 1954, “Lucky Jim” was an immediate success. 

󰀻

Don’t be disappointed because you are not  (A) ; sometimes it pays to   (B)  .
      (A)              (B)
① talented	 ……	practice
② talented	 ……	wait
③ noticed	 ……	practice
④ noticed	 ……	wait
⑤ noticed	 ……	forget
【46-48】다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(A)In a ferryboat crowded with farmers and merchants, (a)a swordsman was boasting about his great victories, swinging his long sword. The other passengers were afraid of this young man, so they pretended to be interested in his stories.
(B)By now the young man got angry, and he challenged the older man to a fight then and there. The older man said he would show his skills at the nearest shore. He asked the ferryman to guide the boat to a tiny nearby island. As they approached the island, (b)the impatient challenger shouted, “Come! I will show you how sharp my sword is!”
(C)He leaped onto the shore. Then, the older man handed the ferryman his sword. He took the ferryman’s long oar and pushed it hard from the island. “Come back! Come back!” the young man screamed. “This is what is called victory without fighting. Jump into the water and swim here!” (c)the winner shouted back to him. Now the passengers began to laugh, looking back at (d)the man on the shore.
(D)But one older man sat to the side, with his eyes closed. He looked indifferent to (e)the storyteller. It began to annoy the young man, who finally called out, “You don’t even know how to use a sword, old man, do you?” “I most certainly do,” answered the older man. “My style is to win without swords of fighting.” “Don’t be ridiculous,” said the young man.


46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (C) - (D) 
② (B) - (D) - (C) 
③ (C) - (D) - (B)
④ (D) - (B) - (C) 
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? 
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

48. 위 글이 주는 교훈으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Old habits die hard.
② Pride will have a fall.
③ A watched pot never boils.
④ A burnt child dreads the fire.
⑤ A liar should have good memory.
【49-50】두 사람의 대립된 의견을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 

Person A  Why do people think children need to work the same way as adults do? The years between six and eighteen are the time when a child should be a child. Think about things like Little League baseball and family vacations. These are the things we grew up with. Imagine a full year of school without summer vacation. Children would be in the classroom nearly as many hours, as perhaps even more than, we are working. And then, they would be working an additional hour or so every night on homework. Without breaks, they would be stressed-out. I am worried about the consequences.

Person B  I’m a high school student. I love summer vacation. It’s fun and easygoing. But that’s the problem. Many students joke about ‘forgetting everything’ over the summer. Sadly, this is mostly true. We forget a lot of stuff we’re taught during the year. Moreover, students are overworked during the semester. My average work week is about thirty-four hours, and I spend at least fifteen hours for homework, studying, and major projects. Things would be easier if we studied during the summer. Students’ daily workload would be reduced if their normal work were _________________. 


49. 위 두 글의 핵심 쟁점으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① abolishing summer vacation
② working part-time after school
③ reducing the burden of homework
④ encouraging after-school activities
⑤ sending children to a summer camp




50. Person B의 빈 칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① fairly evaluated
② interesting and fun
③ focused on real life
④ spread over the full year
⑤ shared with other students





※확인 사항
 문제지와 답안지의 해당란을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.



1
제3교시
성명
수험번호





  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

2008학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지

외국어(영어) 영역



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자와 여자가 선택할 클럽 로고를 고르시오. [1점]

①
②
③
④
⑤







2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① worried	② satisfied	③ relaxed
④ amused	⑤ indifferent

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. 
① 등산 장비 점검 요령 
② 등산 시 지켜야 할 사항 
③ 응급처치 훈련 시 유의 사항
④ 구조 요청 시 알아야 할 사항
⑤ 여가 선용을 위한 장소 선택 요령 

4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① 영화표 예매하기
② 극장 좌석 바꾸기
③ 극장 좌석 확인하기
④ 영화표 예매 취소하기
⑤ 영화 상영 시간 확인하기

5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
① 봉사 활동 담당자	……	봉사 활동 참가 학생
② 회사 연수 담당자	……	신입사원
③ 간호사	……	환자
④ 세탁소 주인	……	고객
⑤ 인턴사원 채용 담당자	……	인턴사원 지원자
6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 한 일을 고르시오. 
① 교통수단 알려 주기	② 웹사이트 주소 가르쳐 주기
③ 보고서 제출해 주기	④ 현장학습 장소 추천해 주기
⑤ 박물관 위치 찾아 주기

7. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학생 면담 시간을 알려 주려고
② 진로 상담실 개설을 안내하려고
③ 학기말 보고서 양식을 알려 주려고
④ 영어 글쓰기 지도 강사를 구하려고
⑤ 무료 영어 글쓰기 지도를 안내하려고

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입하기로 한 MP3 플레이어에 저장 가능한 곡의 수를 고르시오.
① 100	② 200	③ 400	④ 800	⑤ 1,600

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오. 
① service center	② library	③ bank
④ grocery store	⑤ coffee shop

10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일을 고르시오. 
① 강아지를 동물병원에 데리고 가기
② 강아지를 공원에서 산책시키기
③ 동물병원에 진료시간 예약하기
④ 우체국에 소포 부치러 가기
⑤ 강아지를 집에 데려다 주기

11. 대화를 듣고, 다음 업무평가서에 잘못 표기된 것을 고르시오. [3점] 

12. World Leader Contest에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. 
① Contest는 10월 2일에 개최될 예정이다.
② 참가 희망자는 지원서와 자기 소개서를 제출해야 한다.
③ 선정 위원회에서 지원 관련 자료를 심사한다.
④ 서류 심사 통과자는 다음 주 월요일에 공지된다.
⑤ 인터뷰를 통과하면 학교 대표로 참가한다. 



13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.

①	②	③	④	⑤



14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man:____________________________________________
①That would be amazing. Why don’t you give him a call?
②It sounds good, but I’m not interested in working outside.
③I think you would enjoy yourself in the national park.
④That is true. These oranges would be more delicious.
⑤Are you kidding? Could they work as tree planters?



15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:_________________________________________
① That’s great! Those are really incredible animals.
② Really? Do you have the entire series on DVD?
③Those documents are more important than you realize.
④The weird thing is that I didn’t watch TV at all last night.
⑤ What a relief! If I fail this test, I will be in big trouble.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man:____________________________________________
① Sweetheart, when it happens, you will know it.
② I think I’m taking too many classes this year.
③ If you keep trying, you will get hired soon.
④ The business meeting was a complete success.
⑤ Hey, don’t worry. Your mom will get well soon.

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, 선생님이 Laura와 친구들에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Laura’s teacher:____________________________________
①I hope that this year’s class will study as hard as possible.
②Being late for class can affect how well students learn.
③It is important to eat three balanced meals every day.
④Participation is important. It will help your grades.
⑤I’m proud of you. You set an excellent example.



  이제 듣기․말하기 문제는 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Earth is a large, round planet. To see all of Earth, we would have to go around it in a spacecraft. Thanks to this, however, we don’t have to do that. Shaped like a soccer ball, this represents Earth as round rather than flat, and shows what it would look like from outer space. This shows distances, directions, and the shapes and sizes of areas on Earth. This also has a number of lines including one that runs around the center and divides it into two halves horizontally. 
① a chart	② a scale	③ a compass
④ a satellite	⑤ a globe

19. 밑줄 친 it이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Many people believe that a snowflake cannot last more than a few minutes indoors because ①it is a frozen water crystal. However, you can catch a snowflake and keep ②it forever. According to the chemist Tryggvi Emlisson, ‘superglue’ can be used to do this job. It is a thin, runny glue with special molecules which hardens anything ③it touches. With that in mind, Emlisson did an experiment with a snowflake in January 1979. He took a snowflake, locked ④it in a drop of the ‘superglue,’ and kept it for decades. Recently he showed that ⑤it was still well-preserved.
*snowflake: 눈송이
20. 서비스업 종사자에게 쓴 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Sometimes promises made in good faith can’t be kept. Even though we strive to be error-free, it’s inevitable that problems will occur. Not everything that affects your customer’s experience with you is within your control. What should you do when the service promise is broken? When you discover a broken promise or have one pointed out to you, the first thing to do is to apologize. Don’t waste time blaming yourself, your company, or your customer. Admit that something has gone wrong, and immediately find out what your customer’s needs are. 
① 효율적인 여가 시간 활용의 중요성을 강조하려고
② 업무상 약속 불이행 시 대처방법을 조언하려고
③ 업무 관련 연수의 필요성을 안내하려고
④ 새로운 인사관리 시스템을 소개하려고
⑤ 동료 간의 협동정신을 고취하려고

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Philosophy is, simply put, a way of thinking. More accurately, however, it is a set of mental tools. And that fact is directly related to the question of (A)what/whywe study philosophy. It’s not just to amaze our friends with our own profound thinking, or confuse them with (B)unexpected/unexpectedlyquestions, although some college students may value that possibility the most in taking philosophy courses. We study philosophy (C)because/because ofthe mental skills it helps us develop.


 (A)

(B)

(C)
①
what
……
unexpected
……
because
② 
why
……
unexpected
……
because of
③ 
why
……
unexpected
……
because 
④
why
……
unexpectedly
……
because
⑤
what
……
unexpectedly
……
because of


22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? 
College life is busy. There are too many demands on your schedule. Activities, friends, and pastimes may cause some difficulties in your ①performing the real job at hand. When you are feeling ②overwhelmed by presentations, paper deadlines, or tests, you will probably spend all your time studying ③to deal with these pressures. However, this lack of time for relaxation makes it more difficult ④get the most out of your studies. Promise ⑤yourself that no matter how much work you have, you will always relax during one full evening. You will work better if you take time off for relaxation.
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Few animals have been so mercilessly exploited for their fur as the beaver. ①In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, beaver furs were worth their weight in gold. ②As a result, by 1896, at least 14 American states had announced that all of their beavers had been killed. ③By the beginning of the twentieth century, it looked as if the beaver was about to disappear from the face of the earth. ④The beaver is a furry animal like a large rat with a big flat tail. ⑤However, thanks to a beaver recovery program, which included trapping and relocating to protected areas, particularly in suburban areas of the United States, beavers have made an impressive comeback throughout the country.


[24~27] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. Whether you are vacationing in Europe, spending the winter in Florida, or just visiting a friend’s house for the weekend, a successful trip depends on good packing. Nothing is more frustrating than arriving at your destination only to realize that you have left behind your toothbrush, pajamas, important medication, or travel documents. Successful packing requires you to remember everything that you normally need in daily life, as well as any special items you will need at your destination. Unfortunately, most of us pack at the last minute, and this kind of stress can interfere with our memories, increasing the chances of our___________something we might need.
① bringing	② improving
③ achieving	④ understanding
⑤ forgetting


25. The distinctive property of cultural behavior, as ethologists use the term, is the way it is passed on from one generation to the next. Instead of being inherited by the process of Mendelian genetics, it is ‘inherited’ by imitation. An animal acquires a behavior pattern by imitating it from another. Thus, for a species to acquire a culture, its members should be able not only to learn and memorize but also to meet other members of its own species sufficiently often. Cultural behavior is, therefore, most likely to be found in species that ________________.
*ethologist: 동물행동학자
① attack dominant classes	② form social groups
③ survive natural disasters	④ experience mental hardships
⑤ emphasize physical strengths
26. How can I learn to be a manager? A familiar answer to this question is to say that managers learn from experience. But can experience alone be the best way to be a manager? Several writers have expressed their doubts on this matter. Oscar Wilde noted that ‘experience is the name everyone gives to their mistakes.’ And the historian Froude wrote that ‘experience teaches slowly and at the cost of mistakes.’ Experience is an essential way of learning to improve but is an __________ instrument. We also need guidance from a good manager who will help us to learn from mistakes and make better use of them in the future.
① ideal	② unnecessary	③ efficient
④ innovative	⑤ imperfect 



27. Even a relatively small increase in _______________ can make people much happier and lengthen their lives. This was evident when doctors in retirement villages in the United States encouraged residents to decide the details of their daily lives themselves. They were no longer simply presented with their meals, but could choose from a menu. While previously the caretakers watered the plants, the elderly took over this responsibility for themselves. These small changes worked miracles. The senior citizens became ill less frequently, and in interviews expressed greater happiness. Most striking of all, the annual death rate was reduced by half. [3점]
① visits to hospitals
② satisfaction in workplaces
③ payment for overtime work
④ independence in daily lives
⑤ opportunities to meet others



28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Although we eat bananas often, few of us know much about them. The banana tree is the largest plant on earth without a woody stem. The trunk contains a large amount of water and is extremely (A)deliberate/delicate. Though it can reach a full height of 20 feet in one year, even moderate winds can (B)blow/glowit down. The fruit stem or bunch is made up of seven to nine hands, each containing 10 to 20 fingers which grow slowly (C)thorough/througha mass of tightly packed leaf covers. Just before they ripen, they are picked, packaged, and finally delivered to our local supermarkets. 


(A)

(B)

(C)
①
delicate
……
blow
……
through
② 
delicate
……
glow
……
through
③ 
delicate
……
blow
……
thorough
④
deliberate
……
glow
……
thorough
⑤
deliberate
……
blow
……
thorough


29. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]

A bicycle is a two-wheeled steerable machine that is pedaled by the rider’s feet. The wheels are ①installed in-line in a metal frame, with the front wheel held in a rotatable fork. The frame, which is diamond-shaped, is formed by two ②triangles of tubes. The main triangle consists of the top tube, the seat tube, and the down tube, while the ③front triangle consists of the seat tube, chain stays, and seat stays. The saddle fits on ④top of the seat tube. The rider sits on a saddle and steers by turning handlebars that are attached to the fork. The feet turn pedals ⑤linked to cranks. 
*steer: 조종하다

30. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
At certain times in history, cultures have taken it for granted that a person was not fully human unless he or she learned to master thoughts and feelings. In ancient Sparta, in Republican Rome, and among the British upper classes of the Victorian era,  (A) , people were held responsible for keeping control of their emotions. Anyone who lost his or her temper too easily was deprived of the right to be accepted as a member of the community. In other historical periods such as the one in which we are now living,  (B) , the ability to control oneself is not always highly respected. People who attempt it are often thought to be odd. 


     (A)

(B)
①
for example
……
therefore
② 
for example
……
however
③ 
for example
……
moreover
④
on the contrary
……
however
⑤
on the contrary
……
therefore

31. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경을 가장 잘 나타낸 것은?
I heard a sound, and my heart beat quickly. I was excited, and when at last I saw him coming slowly down the stairs, I caught my breath. He was a tall old man with abundant white hair, but his bushy eyebrows were dark still; they made his great eyes flash with a more grave fire. It was wonderful that at his age those black eyes should still preserve their brilliance. There were in his air assurance and gentleness. He was as I should have wished him to be, and as I watched him, I understood how he had moved men’s minds and touched their hearts. He was every inch a poet.
① impressed 	② fearful	③ disappointed
④ relieved	⑤ sorrowful


32. 다음 글의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
In the United States, some people maintain that TV media will create a distorted picture of a trial, while leading some judges to pass harsher sentences than they otherwise might. However, there are some benefits connected to the televising of trials. It will serve to educate the public about the court process. It will also provide full and accurate coverage of exactly what happens in any given case. Therefore, it is necessary to televise trials to increase the chance of a fair trial. And, if trials are televised, a huge audience will be made aware of the case, and crucial witnesses who would otherwise have been ignorant of the case may play their potential role in it.
① 범죄 예방을 위해 재판 과정을 공개해야 한다.
② 준법정신 함양을 위해 재판 과정을 공개해야 한다.
③ 재판 중계권을 방송국별로 공정하게 배분해야 한다.
④ 재판의 공정성을 높이기 위해 재판 과정을 중계해야 한다.
⑤ 증인의 신변 보호를 위하여 법정 공개는 금지되어야 한다.


[33~34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. In World War II, some musicians offered to play for the entertainment of wounded soldiers. They were surprised to see that their performances achieved more than they had expected at first: a diversion from the boredom and routine of hospital life. Their performances resulted in a lessening of depression, greater socialization among the patients, and increased emotional expression. Since then, music has come to be recognized as a practical and productive way to improve physical, emotional, and mental conditions. 
① beneficial effects of music 
② historical development of music 
③ demand for entertainment in hospitals
④ ways to entertain soldiers at war
⑤ techniques for composing music



34. Man has built his world: he has built factories and houses, he produces cars and clothes, he grows grain and fruit, and so on. But he is not really the master any more of the world he has built; on the contrary, this man-made world has become his master, before whom he bows down, and whom he tries to please as best he can. The work of his own hands has become his master. He seems to be driven by self-interest, but in reality he has become an instrument for the purposes of the very machine his hands have built.
① 새로운 생산물에 대한 인간의 끊임없는 도전
② 물질문명에 대한 인간의 무한한 욕구
③ 인간과 기계문명의 상호보완적 관계 
④ 자신이 만든 생산물에 종속된 인간
⑤ 인간의 탐욕이 사회에 미치는 영향



35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?

The chart above shows the changes in the number of birds and of bird species on an island off the coast of Korea from December 2005 to November 2006. ①The largest number of birds was observed in December, and the largest number of species was observed in May. ②July contained the smallest number of both birds and species. ③The greatest decrease in the number of species was observed from June to July. ④There was a continuous decrease in the number of birds from April to July. ⑤In contrast, a continuous increase in the number of birds was noted from July to November.
[36~37] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. One of the most important aspects of human communication is that past experiences will affect your behavior. Even when you start to discuss some event with your friends, you may soon discover there are differences in your perceptions. What you think boring your friends may find exciting; what you consider pointless they may find meaningful. The messages you receive may be the same for each of you. Yet, each person experiences a variety of feelings and sensations, because each has a unique personality and background. Each of you brings different backgrounds to the event and, as a result, each attributes different meanings to the shared experience. 
① 진정한 의사소통은 솔직한 표현을 통해 이루어진다.
② 친구 간의 견해 차이는 대화를 통해 해결할 수 있다.
③ 상호 개성 존중을 통해 원활한 의사소통이 이루어진다.
④ 과거의 경험에 따라 동일한 상황을 다르게 인식한다.
⑤ 경험을 공유하는 것은 친구가 되는 좋은 방법이다.

37. The family is an easy target for those who regard ‘bad people doing bad things’ as the basic cause of social problems. They assume that when the family fails, the rest of society fails. This view of the world is defective in two fundamental respects. First, it does not consider the fact that families reflect social conditions. Second, it ignores the structural reasons for family breakdown and the profound changes occurring throughout the world. Even in very different societies, families are going through similar changes as a result of global economic changes. This phenomenon shows the fact that families cannot avoid social influences on their everyday lives.
① 시대마다 독특한 사회 문제가 있다.
② 가정의 안정은 사회 안정에 도움이 된다.
③ 가정의 문제에는 사회적 상황이 반영된다.
④ 사회 문제의 대부분은 경제적 문제에 기인한다.
⑤ 가정은 사회를 이루는 가장 기본적인 단위이다.

38. Oak tree에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? 
Oaks are kings of the forest. Most of these trees take 100 years to reach maturity. They can grow up to 150 feet high. The trees have thick trunks and large, wide-spreading branches. The leaf is usually deeply toothed, but in some species it is almost smooth at the edge. Oaks vary in appearance but are easily recognized by their fruit―a round nut set in a woody cup. Native Americans and New England pioneers boiled and ate the nuts of the white oak. Squirrels and some birds store them for winter food. Oaks grow widely throughout the mild temperature zone of the Northern Hemisphere. A few species grow at high altitudes in the tropics.
*Northern Hemisphere: 북반구
① 최대한 100피트까지 자랄 수 있다.
② 잎의 테두리가 모두 매끄럽다. 
③ 둥근 형태의 열매를 맺는다.
④ 열매는 식용으로 사용되지 않았다.
⑤ 열대 지역에 널리 분포한다.



39. Maria Edgeworth에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Maria Edgeworth was born in Oxfordshire in 1767. On her father’s second marriage in 1773, she went with him to Ireland. Her father employed her in keeping accounts and in dealing with tenants. She also acquired a familiarity with fashionable people and with poor Irish farmers, all of which was to be of use in her novels. Her father made her a confidential friend, and he also became her literary adviser. Much of her early writing was for children, and it was not until 1800 that she appeared as a novelist for adult readers with the publication of Castle Rackrent. Its detailed description of Irish characters made the book an instant success. After the publication of the book, she became one of Ireland’s major female writers.
*tenant: 소작인
① 1767년에 Oxfordshire에서 태어났다.
② 아버지는 친구이자 문학적 조언자였다.
③ 초기 작품은 주로 어린이를 위한 것이었다. 
④ Castle Rackrent가 그녀의 첫 작품이었다. 
⑤ 아일랜드의 주요 여류 작가 중 한 사람이 되었다.



40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

While browsing through reading materials, he came across an article in a scientific journal.

A group of scientists was doing research on superconductivity but reached a dead end.(①)They finally gave up, putting the work aside so that they could concentrate on other activities.(②)One of the scientists on this project decided to take a break and went down to the company library.(③)The article approached the subject of superconductivity from a completely different direction from the one they had been working on.(④)He immediately began applying it to their experiments and within 12 months they discovered the secret to superconductivity.(⑤)Not long after, they were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics.
*superconductivity: 초전도성
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. The zoologist and specialist in human behavior, Desmond Morris, says that the reason people start to walk like each other is that they have a subconscious need to show their companions that they agree with them and so fit in with them. This is also a signal to other people that ‘we are together, we are acting as one.’ Other studies suggest that we adopt the mannerisms of our company as well, especially our superiors, such as crossing our legs in the same direction as others. An example often given is when, in a meeting, the boss scratches his nose and others at the table then follow him without realizing it.
① Why People Mimic Others
② Take a Walk for Your Health 
③ Good Manners with Superiors
④ Benefits of Good Companionship
⑤ Differences Between Man and Animals

42. It is evident that humans tend to exploit natural resources to benefit themselves. It is equally evident that the use of natural resources without restoring them will eventually lead to their destruction. There are two extreme positions on the issue. Some people maintain that human dominance in nature is a natural process, and as the dominant species humans have the right to exploit all other species. Other people recognize humans as the only one among the living organisms that can change its behavior to preserve other species. They believe that humans have the moral obligation to protect all other forms of life. 
① Our New Environment: Looking for Alternative Resources
② Nature’s Greatest Creation: The History of Humanity
③ Organisms and Humanity: The Future of Exploration
④ Searches for Life Forms in Extreme Locations
⑤ Humanity’s Rights and Obligations to Nature

43. 다음 글의 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
There were some places of worship in the city, and the deep notes of their bells echoed over the town from morning until night. The sun was shining brightly and cheerily, and the air was warm. The streams were flowing with bubbling water, and the tender songs of birds came floating in from the fields beyond the city. The trees were already awake and embraced by the blue sky. Everything around the neighborhood, the trees, the sky, and the sun, looked so young and intimate that they were reluctant to break the spell which might last forever.
① sad and gloomy	② calm and peaceful
③ busy and comic	④ scary and frightening
⑤ weird and threatening
44. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

You might think iced desserts would be a fairly recent creation due to the problems of refrigeration in the past.

(A)What we call ice cream today was created in the early seventeenth century by a French chef for King CharlesⅠof England. After that, it was introduced and popularized in the United States by First Lady Dolly Madison.
(B)He brought the recipe back to Italy, where it has been a favorite ever since. The Arabs and Indians picked up the idea from the Chinese as well, and named this delicious dessert sherbet. But it did not have the exact form and name of ice cream yet.
(C)The Chinese, however, who had perfected ice storage using the principle of evaporation in the eighth century B.C., were enjoying fruit-flavored ices by the time Marco Polo visited in the thirteenth century.
*sherbet: 과즙으로 만든 빙과
① (A)-(B)-(C)	② (B)-(A)-(C)	③ (B)-(C)-(A)
④ (C)-(A)-(B)	⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)


45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

While we’re walking or traveling, we normally spend less than a second looking at everyday objects that we encounter. The days pass by us without our really being aware of them. Scientists have discovered that the average time we spend looking at things has been steadily decreasing during the last 50 years. In their study, they also discovered that this decrease leads to a lack of interest and enjoyment in life. Just try looking at objects for at least five seconds. Good opportunities for this exercise come when you’re walking or looking out of a car or train window. You’ll find that five seconds is long enough to help you appreciate things from a new point of view.

󰀻

Spending more time (A) things around us will allow us to enjoy them from a(n) (B) perspective.



   (A)

(B)
①
observing
……
fresh
② 
making
……
sentimental
③ 
watching
……
resentful
④
collecting
……
objective
⑤
inventing
……
passionate

[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
The seagull, a hawk, and an eagle all laughed heartily. A crow listened gravely. “For fifteen years, I’ve flown this country,” said the eagle, “and I assure you there is no such thing as air crystallizing. Water, yes; air, no.” “You were probably struck by a hailstone,” the hawk told the sparrow. “Or he may have had a stroke,” said the seagull. “What do you think, crow?” “Why, I think maybe the air crystallized on him,” said the crow.
*hailstone: 우박
(B)
A short time ago some builders, working on a studio in Connecticut, left a huge square of plate glass standing upright in a field. A sparrow flying swiftly across the field struck the glass and was knocked out. He woke and went to his club, where an attendant bandaged his head. “What happened?” asked a seagull. “I was flying across a meadow when all of a sudden the air crystallized on me,” said the sparrow.
(C)
The large birds laughed so loudly that the sparrow became annoyed. And then the sparrow bet each of them ten worms that they couldn’t follow the course he had flown without encountering the hardened atmosphere. They all took his bet; the crow went along to watch. Later, the seagull, the eagle, and the hawk decided to fly together over the route the sparrow indicated. “You come, too,” they said to the crow. “I..., I..., well, no,” said the crow. “I don’t think I will.” So, the three large birds took off together. And they hit the glass together and were all knocked out.

46. 위 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (A)-(B)-(C)	② (A)-(C)-(B)	
③ (B)-(A)-(C)	④ (B)-(C)-(A)	
⑤ (C)-(A)-(B)




47. 위 글이 주는 교훈으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 목표 달성을 위해 부지런해야 한다.
② 적극적인 사람이 난관을 극복한다.
③ 우유부단한 사람은 기회를 놓친다.
④ 남의 경험담에 귀 기울여야 한다.
⑤ 용감한 사람이 성공할 수 있다.
48. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 큰 새들은 sparrow를 비웃었다.
② crow는 sparrow의 말을 경청했다.
③ sparrow는 들판을 날다가 유리에 부딪쳤다.
④ sparrow는 싸움을 하다가 다쳤다.
⑤ crow는 내기에 참여하지 않았다.

[49~50] 두 사람의 대립된 의견을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
[Person A]Can you imagine what the world today would be like if Leonardo da Vinci had become a farmer or Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart a banker? What would the world be like without art? To protect and promote culture, governments have a responsibility as representatives of society to (A) the arts. Cultural property is not always in fashion, but remains important. Who, if not the government, would house these treasures for future generations? Without governmental aid to the arts, there would be a great deal of culture lost because of a lack of funding to either promote their creation or protect them for future generations.

[Person B]The importance of art is determined by the people who value it, not by governments acting as its protectors. Culture should not be shaped by governments, but grow naturally from a society of people. When artists show that they are truly gifted, their genius will be recognized and rewarded. If not, it simply has no value in society. It would be absurd to suggest that the government (B) great plumbers, dentists, or bankers. So, it is also absurd to suggest that governments decide what art is and attempt to preserve items they regard as representative of our lives.

49. 위 두 글의 핵심 쟁점으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① art in education
② defining public art
③ diversity of culture
④ combining world cultures
⑤ governmental funding of art

50. 위 두 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 공통으로 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① employ	② support	③ include
④ ignore 	⑤ oppress 

* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.



1
제3교시
성명
수험번호





  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

2008학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지

외국어(영어) 영역



1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 만들 학급 신문의 디자인을 고르시오. [1점]
① 	② 	③ 
④ 	⑤ 

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① relaxed	② amused	③ annoyed
④ curious	⑤ jealous

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오.
① 태껸	② 씨름	③ 검도
④ 권투	⑤ 유도

4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① 주말 영화표 예매하기
② 야외 콘서트 함께 가기 
③ 콘서트 포스터 구해 주기
④ 콘서트 순회 일정 안내해 주기
⑤ 휠체어용 관람 공간 마련해 주기

5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 기숙사 사감 	……학생
② 시계 수리공 	……고객
③ 교통경찰	……시민
④ 도서관장 	……사서
⑤ 아파트 경비원 	……주민
6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 한 일을 고르시오.
① 숙박 장소 추천	② 버스 예약 확인
③ 향토 음식점 소개	④ 신분증 재발급 안내
⑤ 면회 준비 사항 조언

7. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 변경된 봉사활동 계획을 알리려고
② 민박을 제공할 학생을 모집하려고
③ 자매학교 방문 학생을 선발하려고
④ 박물관 견학 일정을 안내하려고
⑤ 학교 홈페이지를 홍보하려고

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불해야 할 금액을 고르시오.
① $80	② $150	③ $180
④ $240	⑤ $300

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
① emergency room	② convenience store
③ daycare center	④ amusement park
⑤ fire station	

10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 보낼 문자 메시지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① Welcome back! Happy Family Reunion!
② You’re the best parents in the world!
③ Congratulations on your promotion!
④ Thank you for the lovely flowers!
⑤ Get well soon, Sweetheart!

11. 다음 광고지를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]

①
②
③
④
⑤

12. 학생 영상물 경연 대회에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하는 것을 고르시오. 
① 가족 행사에 관한 내용이어야 한다.
② 영상물의 길이에는 제한이 없다.
③ 휴대폰 카메라를 사용할 수 있다.
④ 교사 위원회가 작품을 심사한다.
⑤ 10월 초까지 작품을 제출해야 한다. 




13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.

① 	② 	③ 	④ 	⑤ 




14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: ____________________________________________
① Thanks. I’ll call my neighbor right now.
② Really? You should buy another cell phone.
③ I’d love to, but I recharged my phone last night.
④Right. I’ll write down and carry important numbers.
⑤No way. It’s bothersome to carry an extra battery.




15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman: __________________________________________
① I agree with you. I should work at home.
② OK. I’ll go with you, but keep your word. 
③ I didn’t expect you to come home this early.
④ Terrific! Enjoy the trip while I give my presentation.
⑤ How nice! I’ll be at home with my friends all weekend.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: ____________________________________________
① Sure I can. The market isn’t far from here.
② Thanks. I want to go with Dad to the bus station. 
③ Don’t worry. I’ll try to finish before she gets here.
④ I’m sorry. I didn’t buy any fruit on my way home.
⑤ That’s a great idea. Let’s go out for some fresh air.

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, 선생님이 민수에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Minsu’s teacher: Minsu, ____________________________
① I hope you’ll help the teachers at school.
② I’ll be happy to help you with any problems.
③ I think success comes from knowing yourself. 
④ I’m sure your parents are telling me the truth.
⑤ I really appreciate your help with my project.


  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This refers to a kind of building for sheltering animals, their feed, farm supplies, farm machinery, and farm products. Sometimes this is used for storing hay and grain, too. The need for this has declined with the introduction of tractors and electrical services. Traditionally, wood was used in constructing this, but sheet steel and aluminum have been increasingly used since World War II, particularly on large farms in North American and European countries. This usually consists of two stories, the first to shelter animals or machines and the second to store hay or grain.
① barn	② cottage	③ garage
④ windmill	⑤ factory

19. 밑줄 친 they[their]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? 
Whether woven or printed, a fine tie is a work of art from beginning to end. Woven silk ties are the most luxurious of all. Though less common today, ①they were at one time the essential accessory of a true gentleman. Because of ②their high manufacturing cost, woven silk ties are very expensive. This in part accounts for the fact that ③they now represent only five percent of tie production. But ④they will never fall entirely by the wayside and will make periodic comebacks. Printed silk ties are much cheaper and simpler than ⑤their woven counterparts. However, silk printing demands a high level of technical mastery. 	*woven: (실로) 짠
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Although most people use the bus or subway to get around Seoul, every once in a while it’s nice to spend a sunny day crossing the city on a bicycle. While riding, you are certain to discover new streets and different views of the capital. “The key to enjoying cycling is to choose the right streets,” says one city official, adding that alleys off main roads can be interesting areas to explore. If you only ride occasionally, you don’t have to spend a lot of money because bikes can be rented. Let’s discover Seoul and learn about its undiscovered back streets on a bike. 
① 교통난 해소를 위해 대중교통 이용을 권장하려고   
② 에너지 절약을 위해 자전거 타기를 홍보하려고 
③ 자전거를 이용한 도시 구경을 장려하려고
④ 자전거 전용 도로 설치를 건의하려고
⑤ 자전거 보관 장소를 안내하려고

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I had twenty village girls to teach, some of them with such a strong country accent (A) that/what I could hardly communicate with them. Only three could read, and none could write, so at the end of my first day I felt quite (B)depressing/depressed at the thought of the hard work ahead of me. But I reminded myself that I was fortunate to have any sort of job, and that I would certainly get used to (C)teaching/being taught these girls, who, although they were very poor, might be as good and as intelligent as children from the greatest families in England.
    (A)             (B)                (C)
① that	……	depressed	……	teaching
② that	……	depressing	……	being taught
③ that	……	depressed	……	being taught
④ what	……	depressing	……	being taught
⑤ what	……	depressed	……	teaching 

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? 
The bodies of flowing ice we call glaciers ①are the most spectacular of natural features. They result from densely packed snow. Unlike a stream, a glacier cannot be seen ②move. Accurate measurements, however,  show that it is flowing. Erosion of bedrock by glaciers and deposits of the eroded materials are characteristic and ③easily recognizable. Their distribution enables us to infer that in the recent past glaciers have been far more extensive ④than they are today. At the same time, this evidence has ⑤raised the problem of the cause of the ‘ice ages.’ 	*erode: 침식하다
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
When drawing human figures, children often make the head too large for the rest of the body. A recent study offers some insight into this common imbalance in children’s drawings. ①As part of the study, researchers asked children between four and seven years old to make several drawings of adults. ②When they drew frontal views of the adults, the size of the heads was markedly enlarged. ③Adults tended to draw children’s faces larger than their own. ④However, when the children drew rear views of the adults, the size of the heads was not nearly so exaggerated. ⑤The researchers suggest that children draw bigger heads when they know that they must leave space for facial details. 

[24~27] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. Often the best form of communication with friends is, surprisingly, ____________. Friendship is not only about what we say, but even more importantly about what we do not. True friendship occurs when ‘information’ is conveyed by absences of words. The point is to convey as much as possible indirectly, ‘between the lines.’ The reason such ‘negative’ communication is important is that it requires a greater closeness than positive communication. The greater the distance between sender and receiver, the more the need for directness. Only when two or more people share an enormous amount can the much more economical negative communication take place.
① silence	② sincerity	③ negotiation
④ honesty	⑤ courage


25. Team performance is not possible if the leader grabs all the best chances, assignments and credit for himself or herself. Indeed, the crucial point of the leader’s challenge is to _________________________________. When the Dollus Bank team leader Trevor Canfield made room for a junior investment banker to lead a prestigious account, he did just that. So did Mike Fangos at Gopak, when he encouraged a chemical engineer who “could not balance his checkbook at home” to take responsibility for preparing the Zebra Team’s $200 million budget. Stepping out of the way to give opportunities to others, however, does not mean giving up responsibility for guidance, monitoring, and control. [3점]
① drive all of the team members into competition
②give direct instructions and orders to the executives
③ recruit competent and qualified people for the team  
④ take charge of all assignments by himself or herself
⑤provide performance opportunities to the team members
26. Michel de Montaigne, the sixteenth-century French essayist, loved conversation. “To my taste,” he says, “the most fruitful and natural exercise of our mind is conversation. I find the practice of it the most delightful activity in our lives.” According to Montaigne, “studying books is a weak mental activity, while conversation provides teaching and excercise all at once.” Montaigne thinks of conversation as ______________________ that will improve his mind. “If I am fighting with a strong and solid opponent, he will attack me; his ideas send mine soaring. Rivalry, competitiveness and glory will drive me and raise me above my own level. Our mind is strengthened by contact with dynamic and well-ordered minds.”
① a regular meditation	② an accidental discovery
③ an efficient field study	④ a psychological disorder
⑤ an intellectual sporting event

27. Studies regarding our habits of eating out found that, when we eat out, we tend to underestimate the number of calories we consume by up to half. When we eat in a relaxing, candle-lit restaurant, we tend to enjoy our food longer even if we are full. Dining with friends also contributes to consuming more calories. Researchers found that women who dined with two or three friends ate 700 calories on average, double that of solo diners. Our psychology is another factor in the consumption of calories. A waiter who greeted customers with the question, “What are we celebrating tonight?” _______________________ than waiters who didn’t. Therefore, if you treat dining as a special occasion, you’re more likely to eat more. 
① got more orders	②dined out more frequently
③ was in a worse mood	④delivered food more slowly
⑤ consumed more calories

28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The day of the whale is rapidly approaching its end. Some species of whales are already (A)infinite/extinct. Others are being reduced in number faster than they can reproduce. When whales are gone, the whole chain of life in the sea, as we know it, will be (B)upset/stable. And eventually this will have a direct effect on the life of man, too. Although there are international agreements signed by some governments, people are killing whales without considering what future (C)conveniences/consequences this will have. Let’s save whales, friends of the earth.
    (A)	      (B)	       (C)
① infinite	……	stable	……	conveniences
② infinite	……	stable	……	consequences
③ extinct	……	stable	……	conveniences
④ extinct	……	upset	……	consequences
⑤ extinct	……	upset	……	conveniences

29. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]

When a ballet dancer leaps across the stage in a grand jump, her center of mass faithfully follows a parabolic path during the jump. The distance between the top of her head and her center of mass ①changes depending upon the movements of her legs. When she ②stretches her legs out horizontally after her feet leave the stage, her center of mass moves upward. It results in an ③increase in the distance between the top of her head and her center of mass. In contrast, when the dancer ④lowers her legs toward the ground, the opposite occurs. The height of the top of her head remains ⑤constant throughout the jump. The result gives the impression that the dancer isdrifting through the air.

30. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Soaring eagles have the incredible ability to see a mouse in the grass from a mile away.    (A)   , cats have the extraordinary ability to see in the dark. Through natural selection over time, these animals have developed  visual systems uniquely adapted to their way of life. The human visual system has also adapted to many things well.    (B)    our night vision is not as good as that of a cat, our color vision is excellent. This is not a bad tradeoff, since being able to enjoy a sunset’s beauty seems worth an occasional fall in the dark.
     (A)                 (B)
① Similarly	……	Although
② Similarly	……	Once
③ Similarly	……	Before
④ Instead		……	Before
⑤ Instead		……	Once
31. 다음 글에 드러난 Henry의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Henry was moving the soccer ball down the field thrilled with the prospect of scoring a goal−the first in his entire life. In his haste, he didn’t realize that his teammates weren’t anywhere near him. Concentrating, filled with expectation, he sped eagerly toward the goal. It wasn’t until the last second that he noticed who the goalkeeper was−his teammate! It was too late, however, as Henry’s foot had already begun moving to kick the ball into the net. A perfect kick! Then total silence! Henry realized that he had made a terrible mistake. He had scored for the opposing team. Henry glanced at his coach who looked furious as he screamed at him. He wanted the earth to swallow him up.
① sorrowful	 → joyful	② angry	→ calm
③ concerned	 → relieved	④ lonely	→ envious
⑤ excited 	 → embarrassed

32. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Children grow up and leave home. They go from helpless babies to mature adults while our back is turned. The secret is to try and keep pace with them. We have to resist the urge to do everything for them, and let them fry eggs or paint trash cans for themselves. By the time they reach adolescence, we may expect them to be able to keep their room tidy for the first time. But they have never done it before. They have to learn how to do it, and part of that learning process is not doing it, doing it badly, and doing it differently from how we would do it. Growing is a messy business. Our job is to help them, that is, to hand them responsibility slowly, bit by bit.
① Assist kids in doing their homework.
② Give kids the chance to learn responsibility. 
③ Set strict rules for the benefit of your kids.
④ Teach kids to help their neighbors in need.
⑤ Allow kids to experience messy things first.

[33~34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. Many years ago, my drama director, frustrated with my bad acting in a play, shouted, “No! No! Your body is contradicting your words. Every tiny movement reveals your private thoughts.” Then he said something I’ll never forget: “The way you move is your autobiography in motion.” How right he was! On the stage of real life, every physical move you make subconsciously tells everyone the story of your life. As dogs hear sounds our ears can’t detect, people make and notice moves that are beneath human consciousness but have tremendous power to attract or offend.
① body movement as a reflection of our mind
② sign language as an indicator of nervousness
③ cultural differences in writing autobiographies
④ the hidden power of human consciousness in drama
⑤the contrast between animal and human hearing systems

34. Science is all about trying ideas, abandoning those that don’t work, and building on those that do. It never stops. Those people in the past who had wrong ideas weren’t fools. They were doing the best they could, given the knowledge of their times. We do the same thing today. And you can be sure that people in the future will look back and wonder why we believe some of the things we do. Does that make science unimportant? If some of our scientific theories are going to be proved false, why bother studying them? If you believe something is an absolute truth, you can just memorize it and get on with your life. After all, there is always something to explore in the world. 
① 과학의 절대적 진리와 중요성
② 과학자에게 요구되는 윤리 의식
③ 지속적인 과학 탐구의 당위성
④ 과학이 산업 발전에 미치는 영향
⑤ 과학자에게 필요한 인문학적 소양

35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?

The graph above shows the results of a survey conducted in 2005 regarding young Australians’ sources of advice by age group. ①Friends, parents, and relatives were the three most common sources of advice for all age groups, although their relative importance varied with age. ②As age increased, friends progressively became a more important source of advice, while parents and relatives became less important. ③Those aged from 11 to 14 turned more often to parents than friends for advice. ④For young Australians aged from 15 to 19, friends was the biggest source of advice, followed by parents. ⑤For those aged from 20 to 24, their dependence upon mass media was the lowest among the three age groups, while their dependence upon teachers was the highest.
36. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

The result is that the population enters a period of rapid growth.

There is an interesting relationship between a country’s developmental progress and its population structure. (　①　) According to the theory of demographic transition, nations go through several developmental stages. (　②　) The earliest stage is characterized by high birth and death rates and slow growth. (　③　)　As they begin to develop, the birth rate remains high, but the death rate falls. (　④　)  Then, as industrialization peaks, the birth rate falls and begins to approximate the death rate. (　⑤　) Eventually, population growth slows drastically, reaching a stage of very modest growth which is seen in many European nations today. 	*demographic: 인구(통계)의

[37~38] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
37. “What is value to the customer?” is the most important question in business, yet is rarely asked. One reason is that managers are quite sure that they know the answer. Value is what they, in their business, define as quality. But this is almost always the wrong definition. The customer never buys a product but the satisfaction of a want. For the teenage girl, for instance, value in a shoe is high fashion. Price is a secondary consideration and durability is not value at all. For the same girl as a young mother, a few years later, what she looks for is durability, price and comfort.	*durability: 내구성
① 소비자는 품질을 고려하여 상품을 구매해야 한다.
② 경영자는 품질보다 가격을 우선시해서는 안 된다.
③ 경영자는 소비자의 상품 구매 기준을 이해해야 한다.
④ 소비자는 상품을 구매할 때 유행을 따라서는 안 된다.
⑤ 경영자는 공공 이익을 우선하여 상품을 개발해야 한다.

38. By thinking the right thoughts, you can make any job less distasteful. Your boss wants you to be more interested in your job so that he or she will make more money. But let’s forget about what the boss wants. Think only of what getting interested in your job will do for you. Remind yourself that it may double the amount of happiness you get out of life, for you spend about one half of your waking hours at work. Keep reminding yourself that getting interested in your job will take your mind off your worries, and in the long run, will probably bring about promotion and increased pay. Even if it doesn’t do that, it will reduce fatigue to a minimum and help you enjoy your hours of leisure.
① 직장 상사의 의견을 존중해야 한다.
② 집안일을 직장으로 가져가지 말아야 한다.
③ 업무 시간을 줄이고 여가 시간을 늘려야 한다. 
④ 직장의 일을 즐기면 더 행복한 삶을 살 수 있다.
⑤ 직장에서는 마음을 터놓을 수 있는 동료가 필요하다. 




39. artificial skin에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
A group of researchers have recently developed an artificial skin that can detect both pressure and temperature at the same time. They inserted pressure sensors and temperature sensors in a thin plastic film to create a net-like structure. The new artificial skin is flexible enough to wrap around robot fingers and relatively inexpensive to make. This breakthrough has the potential to improve how robots will function in the real world. Future artificial skins could incorporate sensors not only for pressure and temperature, but also for light, humidity, strain or sound.
① 압력과 온도를 동시에 감지할 수 있다.
② 얇은 플라스틱 필름 속에 감지 장치가 삽입되어 있다.
③ 로봇 손가락에 감을 수 있을 정도로 유연하다.
④ 실생활에서 로봇의 기능을 향상시킬 잠재력을 갖고 있다.
⑤ 빛과 소리의 감지 기능을 통합하지는 못할 것이다.




40. red fox에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The red fox often acts in ways that seem extremely crafty. Trappers seeking red foxes must clean their equipment well to rid it of human smells, or the foxes will not come near. The foxes also manage to dig up hidden traps and set them off without being caught. Red foxes have even been known to use a pedestrian underpass rather than cross a highway. On the other hand, red foxes are sometimes extremely careless. They often come running in response to an imitation of their bark, regardless of danger. They readily return to areas where they have been heavily hunted in the past. So whether or not the red fox is especially intelligent is an open question.
① 사람 냄새를 맡고 가까이 온다.
② 숨겨진 덫을 파헤치기도 한다.
③ 고속도로 위로 다닐 만큼 대담하다.
④ 과거에 쫓겼던 지역에는 돌아오지 않는다.
⑤ 지능이 높은 것으로 입증되었다.
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. Sleep recharges our brains and helps us think more clearly. But more importantly it is a time when noise from the world outside is shut off and creative energy from the deepest inner mind can break through. It’s no wonder why you often wake up with great ideas after a sound sleep. Or why Elias Howe thought of the idea of a sewing machine after waking up. Or why Dmitri Mendeleev literally dreamed up the periodic table of elements. If you aren’t making time for sleep, you are limiting your creativity and your life’s potential. 
① Coping with Sleeping Problems
② Creativity through Good Sleep
③ Creativity and Its Potential
④ Advice for a Sound Sleep
⑤ Leading a Peaceful Life

42. All cells need energy to live, whether they are muscle cells in a hiker’s leg, or young yeast cells turning a tank of grape juice into wine. Regardless of type, however, no cell can ‘make’ energy. Energy can neither be created nor destroyed, but can merely be transformed from one state to another. Each cell must therefore obtain its energy from some outside environmental source, and cells do so in a range of ways. Yeast cells growing on a grape skin obtain energy from nutrient molecules originally processed within the grape leaves and stored within the fruit. Humans obtain energy from molecules present in the plant and animal matter they eat and digest. 	*yeast: 효모
① Conditions for Good Nutrition 
② Process of Making Muscles
③ Analysis of Muscle Cells
④ Energy Sources of Cells 
⑤ Reproduction of Cells

43. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
Twenty-four-year-old Bob was swimming along the beach about one hundred yards offshore. When he was  forty feet away from a group of bathers who were swimming in about five feet of water, he suddenly let out a scream. All the bathers could hear was a lot of noise resulting from Bob’s attempts to get out of the water. One of the group, Tim, realizing that something was wrong, rushed to Bob’s aid. Tim grabbed the struggling Bob and attempted to pull him toward shore, but in vain. Some lifeguards immediately launched their surf boat and set out toward the troubled swimmer.
① urgent	② peaceful	③ romantic
④ monotonous	⑤ festive
44. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

  When a basketball team finds itself on the wrong side of momentum, or when its opponent has gained the advantage, the coach calls for a timeout.

(A)Likewise, we must occasionally call timeout. In the cycles of life and business we have times when we must break the rhythm of failure and loss. During this break in the action we must determine what is working and what is not.
(B)The pause along with the adjusted game plan can also increase the team’s confidence and break its downward cycle. It can change the rhythm of the game. 
(C)The timeout can break the momentum and allows the coach to adjust the game plan. He may have noticed a weakness on the other side that his team can utilize.	*momentum: 여세, 힘
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C) 	
③ (B)-(C)-(A)	④ (C)-(A)-(B)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)



45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

  I believe mystery plays a fundamental role in experiencing the great things in life. If you can determine the chemicals that exist in a food or wine, does that help you understand why you like the taste? Do you think that being able to list all the reasons you love a person enables you to love that person more or differently? If something is beautiful to you, can you really explain why in a meaningful way? There are many sensations and feelings that we can experience but not fully define. Once we give up the belief that definition of these emotions is necessary or possible, we can actually experience them more completely because we have removed the analytical filter we use to find definitions.

󰀻

The attempt to  (A)  things in definite ways prevents us from   (B)   them deeply and completely.

     (A)	      (B)
① analyze	……	experimenting
② analyze	……	appreciating
③ mystify	……	discovering
④ mystify	……	investigating
⑤ mystify	……	justifying
[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
My freshman year flew by. Your Spanish class quickly became my favorite class. You taught us through arts and crafts, music, and pictures. All of your classes were incredibly visually stimulating. Your classes were just unusual enough to be completely memorable. Before I knew it, I found myself looking forward to your class, which was the last period of the day. I barely realized that the 180th day had arrived. I had done well throughout the year, and felt that I had learned a reasonable amount of new information, but that certainly didn’t mean that I understood Spanish. You still had to prove me wrong, as you’d promised so many months ago. 
(B)
I walked into your class for the last time, ever skeptical, and listened as you reread the passage from the first class. My jaw dropped in amazement when, as promised, I understood every word! All of those episodes of Muzzy cartoons and silly mnemonic devices had actually come together to form something surprisingly intelligible. I looked around at the rest of the class. The stunned faces that surrounded me proved that everyone else had also understood. The feeling of pride and accomplishment that came over me was incredible, and it is something that I will never forget.
	*mnemonic: 기억을 도와주는
(C)
On the first day of Spanish class, you read us a paragraph in a language that we knew nothing about, and I didn’t understand a word of it. From the panicked faces I saw around the room, none of my classmates did either. You promised us that on the last day of class when you reread it, we would understand. I rolled my eyes, knowing that there was no way I would be able to comprehend something so foreign by June. I gave you 180 days to prove me wrong, but remained content in knowing that you wouldn’t be able to do it. 

46. 위 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)	③ (B)-(C)-(A)
④ (C)-(A)-(B)	⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)

47. 밑줄 친 prove me wrong이 의미하는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① prove that I would hate Spanish class
② prove that I would be a language teacher
③ prove that I would understand the paragraph
④ prove that I would fail the Spanish test
⑤ prove that I would feel guilty
48. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 나는 스페인어 수업을 좋아하게 되었다.
② 스페인어 수업에 다양한 시청각 자료가 활용되었다.
③ 첫 수업 때 하셨던 선생님의 약속은 그대로 이루어졌다.
④ 우리는 처음과 마지막 수업에서 같은 지문을 들었다.
⑤ 학년 초부터 스페인어를 잘하는 친구가 많았다.

[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Mel, a chimpanzee in Gombe, Nigeria, was three years old when his mother died. He had no elder brother or sister to adopt him. To our amazement, he was adopted by a twelve-year-old chimpanzee, Spindle, who was certainly not related to Mel. As weeks passed, the two became    (A)   . Spindle took care of Mel while traveling; he permitted (a)the infant to ride on his back, even allowed him to hang beneath, as a mother carries her baby. Most remarkably, if Mel got too close to the big males, Spindle would hurry to remove (b)his small charge from danger even though this meant he got into trouble himself. 
For a whole year, this relationship endured, and there was no doubt that Spindle saved Mel’s life. Why did Spindle act that way, burdening himself with the care of (c)a sickly youngster? Probably we shall never know, but it is interesting to reflect that during the plague that claimed Mel’s mother, Spindle’s mother also died. Is it possible that Spindle’s loss of his mother left an empty space in his life? And that the contact with (d)a dependent baby helped to fill that space? Or did Spindle experience an emotion similar to that which we call(B)   ? Perhaps (e)the lonely chimpanzee felt a mixture of both.

49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


50. 위 글에서 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
      (A)               (B)
① inseparable	……	revenge
② inseparable	……	sympathy
③ indifferent	……	revenge
④ indifferent	……	sympathy
⑤ indifferent	……	affection

* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.







  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

2009학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지

외국어(영어) 영역


제3교시

1

짝수형

성명

수험번호


1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 사용할 그래프를 고르시오. [1점]
①	②
   	   
③	④
   	   
⑤
   

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① angry	② proud	③ bored
④ sorrowful	⑤ uninterested

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. 
① 헌혈	② 적성 검사	③ 예방 접종
④ 면접	⑤ 체력 검사

4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① to buy a dog	 to visit Tom’s mother
 to call Tom’s father	④ to play the piano
 to ask Tom to study with her

5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $300	② $350	③ $400	④ $450	⑤ $500
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 새 이웃과 알고 지내는 방법을 알려주려고
② 올바른 설탕 보관 방법을 설명하려고
③ 이웃 간 예절의 중요성을 강조하려고
④ 새로운 제빵 기술을 소개하려고
⑤ 이사하기 전에 점검해야 할 사항을 조언하려고


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오. 
① to recommend a Canadian professor
② to send the quiz items by e-mail
③ to give advice on some quiz items
④ to buy books on geography
⑤ to advertise the quiz show


8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 약사—고객	② 의사—배드민턴 선수
③ 체육 교사—학생	④ 악기점 주인—판매원
⑤ 스포츠 용품점 직원—손님


9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
① 면세점	② 세관	③ 여행사
④ 활주로	⑤ 관제탑


10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
 편의점 들르기	 자전거 수리하기
 목격자 만나기	 경찰에 신고하기
 시청 방문하기


11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]

①
②
③
④
⑤

12. Summer History Field Trip에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
①참가자들은 위스콘신 지역의 역사 유적지를 탐방한다.
②8월 3일에 시작하여 5일 동안 진행된다.
③웹사이트에서 등록할 수 있다.
④등록비는 150달러이며 식비는 별도이다.
⑤참가자들은 편안한 옷과 신발을 가져와야 한다.

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
 
①	②	③	④	⑤

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:__________________________________________
①I didn’t know you already returned the books.
②It’s good to hear that you’ve saved a lot.
③Borrow the books instead of buying them.
④You have to be responsible for what you did.
⑤I want to borrow some books from the library.

15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:____________________________________________
① Yeah. You’re really a great help.
② I’m sorry, but I can’t help you out.
③ You should have slept more than that.
④ No, thanks. I’ve had enough coffee.
⑤ Don’t worry! Just go to see a doctor.

16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Woman:___________________________________________
① Sure. That’s why I want to wear these clothes longer.
② You’re right. I’d like to take these clothes to the store.
③ Certainly. I won’t buy second-hand items again. 
④ OK. I’ll go to the store and ask for a refund.
⑤ That’s true. I’m not making the profit I expected. 
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Mark가 Peter에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Mark:____________________________________________
① Hey, cheer up! Your mother is here to watch you.
② Why didn’t you invite your mother to the competition?
③ Your mother has already left the swimming pool.
④ Peter, I didn’t know your mother is a good swimmer.
⑤ Congratulations! Finally, you beat your competitors.




  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This is different from all other markets in that people do not buy things here such as clothes, shoes, or cars. Thanks to this, people can easily exchange one country’s money with that of another. People desire to make such exchanges for many reasons. Some are concerned with the import or export of goods or services between one country and another. Others wish to move capital from one area to another. Still others may want to travel to a foreign country. This is incredibly important to the global economy. This gets influenced by a real world event, and has an impact on the economy of a nation, causing the value of its money to rise and fall.
① 벼룩시장	② 주식시장	③ 외환시장
④ 재래시장	⑤ 경매시장



19. 밑줄 친 He[he]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Flying over rural Kansas in an airplane one fall evening was a delightful experience for passenger Walt Morris. ①He watched the twinkling farmhouse lights below. Suddenly, the peace of the evening was broken when the plane’s landing lights started flashing on and off. ‘What’s happening?’ ②he wondered as he gripped the armrests. As the pilot was about to make an announcement, ③he thought, ‘This is it. He’s going to tell us we’ve got a major problem.’ Instead, ④he told the passengers, “In case you’re worried about the flashing lights outside the plane, I’m sending a signal to my kids.” ⑤He was relieved to hear the continued announcement: “They’re at home over on that hill to the left, and they just sent me a Morse code message saying, ‘Good night, Dad.’”
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
If you are worrying about money when you are away, your enjoyment will suffer. Plan your budget in advance to give yourself time to research the costs fully. If you cannot get confirmed prices, get as many estimates as you can. Note the best price and the worst price and budget in between the two. Ideally, the budgeted figures will work out just about right. If they don’t, you will have to use your emergency fund to cover basic expenses such as food, transport, and accommodation, and there will be less money available for an unexpected situation that necessitates a sudden change of plan. So, be sure to make your budget realistic, so that you can be confident that you will be able to pay for all aspects of the trip.
① 여행 중 상품 구매 시 주의 사항을 알려주려고
② 여행 경비 예산 짜기에 대해 조언하려고
③ 과도한 여행 경비 지출의 위험을 경고하려고
④ 여행 중 위급 상황에 대처하는 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 여행 시 적절한 교통수단에 대해 안내하려고

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many social scientists have believed for some time (A)that/what birth order directly affects both personality and achievement in adult life. In fact, people have been using birth order to account for personality factors such as an aggressive behavior or a passive temperament. One might say, “Oh, I’m the eldest of three sisters, so I can’t help that I’m so overbearing,” or “I’m not very successful in business, because I’m the youngest child and thus less (B)aggressively/aggressive than my older brothers and sisters.” Recent studies, however, have proved this belief to be false. In other words, birth order may define your role within a family, but as you mature into adulthood, (C)accepted/acceptingother social roles, birth order becomes insignificant. 
   (A) 			     (B)		    (C)
① that	……	aggressively	……		accepting
② that	……	aggressive	……		accepting
③ that	……	aggressive	……		accepted
④ what	……	aggressive	……		accepted
⑤ what	……	aggressively	……		accepted

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
You may think that moving a short distance is so easy that you can do it in no time with ①little effort. You may decide to use your own car because you think that you don’t need the services of a moving company. Well, you might be wrong. You are under the false impression that you do not have as many items to pack as you really ②do. You find out ③too late that your car cannot carry as much as you thought it could. So, it takes you far more trips to your new home than you thought it would. There is also the possibility of ④damage your stuff, some of it valuable. All these things ⑤considered, it might be better to ask for the services of a moving company.
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Roman doll-makers continued to use technology developed by the Egyptians and Greeks, but in line with the artistic sensibilities of their culture, they were constantly trying to make dolls more elegant and beautiful. ①One doll, found near Prati in Rome, was made of ivory and lay beside her owner who had died at the age of eighteen. ②The huge growth in the understanding of civilization raised awareness of other important roles of trade. ③Next to the doll was a small box, also made of ivory, containing tiny combs and a silver mirror. ④The doll had rings on her fingers and held a tiny key, which unlocked the box. ⑤Like children today, the younger members of Roman civilization would have dressed and undressed their dolls, and decorated their hair and fingers according to the latest fashions.



[24~27]다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. While the fine art object is valued because it is unique, it is also valued because it can be reproduced for                . For example, Van Gogh’s paintings have been reproduced endlessly on posters, postcards, coffee mugs, and T-shirts. Ordinary consumers can own a copy of the highly valued originals. Therefore, the value of the original results not only from its uniqueness but from its being the source from which reproductions are made. The manufacturers who produce art reproductions and the consumers who purchase and display them give value to the work of art by making it available to many people as an item of popular culture.
① art education	② artists’ imagination
③ cultural diversity	④ scholarly research
⑤ popular consumption



25. There are some people who believe that no one should be trusted. They usually feel this way because their behavior compels others to lie to them. In other words, they make it difficult for others to tell them the truth because they respond rudely or emotionally to people who tell the truth. If others see how angry, hurt, or hateful you become when they tell you the truth, they will avoid telling it to you at all costs. If you are known as someone who is easily offended, you will never know what others are really thinking or feeling because they will                 to escape from your negative reaction. If you demand that children tell you the truth and then punish them because it is not very satisfying, you teach them to lie to you to protect themselves.
① distort the truth	② protect their children
③ waste your expenses	④ hurt your feelings
⑤ reveal their anger
26. One of the main principles I follow when I draw outside is                                   . I try to stay away from houses or barns that have unusual angles of the roof, or objects that look incorrect in size, perspective, or design. If the subject is confusing when you look at it, it will be more confusing when you attempt to draw it. I know a beautiful barn where the corners are not at right angles. No matter how many times I have drawn it, the perspective does not look right. If I were to make an accurate drawing of this barn and put it in a show, I’m sure I would get all kinds of criticism for my poor perspective. I would not be there to tell my critics that the barn is actually constructed this way. So, I stay away from subjects that do not look right to me.
① to convert inaccurate drawings into accurate ones
② not to draw any objects that others have drawn
③ to draw an object with imagination
④ to get information from abstract subjects
⑤ not to select a subject that is too difficult or odd

27. When faced with things that are too big to sense, we comprehend them by                                 . The first appearance of a shining star in a darkening evening sky can take you out into the universe if you combine what you see with the twin facts that the star is merely one of the closest of the galaxy’s 200 billion stars and that its light began traveling decades ago. The smell of gasoline going into a car’s tank during a refueling stop, when combined with the fact that each day nearly a billion gallons of crude oil are refined and used in the United States, can allow our imagination to spread outward into the vast global network of energy trade and politics. [3점]
*crude oil: 원유
① adding knowledge to the experience
② understanding the energy policy of a nation
③ comparing the universe with human beings
④ associating the objects with their names
⑤ establishing the local network

28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The first experiments in television broadcasting began in France in the 1930s, but the French were slow to employ the new technology. There were several reasons for this (A)hesitancy/consistency. Radio absorbed the majority of state resources, and the French government was reluctant to shoulder the financial burden of developing national networks for television broadcasting. Television programming costs were too high, and program output correspondingly low. Poor (B)distribution/descriptioncombined with minimal offerings provided little incentive to purchase the new product. Further, television sets were priced beyond the means of a general public whose modest living standards, especially in the 1930s and 1940s, did not allow the acquisition of luxury goods. Ideological influences also factored in; elites in particular were (C)optimistic/skepticalof television, perceiving it as a messenger of mass culture and Americanization.
      (A)              (B)		        (C)
① hesitancy	……	distribution	……  optimistic
② hesitancy	……	distribution	……  skeptical
③ hesitancy	……	description	……  optimistic
④ consistency	……	description	……  optimistic
⑤ consistency	……	distribution	……  skeptical


29. 다음 바이올린 줄의 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]




A violin creates tension in its ①strings and gives each of them an equilibrium shape: a straight line. A tight violin string can be viewed as composed of many individual pieces that are connected in a chain as in the above two figures. When the string is ②straight, as in Figure 1, its tension is uniform, and the two outward forces on a given piece sum to zero; they have equal magnitudes and point in ③opposite directions. With no net forces acting on its pieces, the string is in equilibrium. But when the string is ④curved, as in Figure 2, the outward forces on its pieces no longer sum to zero. Although the string’s uniform tension still gives those outward forces equal magnitudes, they now point inslightly different directions, and each piece experiences a ⑤zero net force. The net forces on its pieces are restoring forces, which will cause the string to vibrate and thus make sounds.
*equilibrium: 평형   **magnitude: 크기


30. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘She’의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Her nerves were hurting her. She looked automatically again at the high, uncurtained windows. As night fell, she could just perceive outside a huge tree swinging its branches. The rain came flying on the window. Ah, why didn’t she have peace? These two men, her husband and her son, why did they not come? She wrapped a large scarf around her and hesitated for a moment. She opened the door and stepped out into the backyard. There was no sign of a light anywhere. She listened with all her ears but could hear nothing but the night. “James!―Shawn!” she called, but nothing came from the darkness.
① safe and relieved	② relaxed and comfortable
③ nervous and worried	④ satisfied and pleased
⑤ cold and indifferent
31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sheets of paper exist almost entirely for the purpose of carrying information, so we tend to think of them as neutral objects. We rarely interpret marks on paper as references to the paper itself.   (A)  , when we see the text, characters, and images on artifacts that serve other purposes, we generally interpret these marks as labels that do refer to their carriers. Natural objects do not come with labels, of course, but these days, most physical artifacts do.   (B)  , their designers have chosen to shift part of the burden of communication from the form and materials of the artifact itself to lightweight surface symbols. So, for example, a designer of door handles might not worry about communicating their functions through their shapes, but might simply mark them ‘push’ and ‘pull.’
*artifact: 인공물
     (A)		(B)
①However  ……	Otherwise
②However	……	That is
③Likewise	……	In contrast
④Besides	……	In contrast
⑤Besides	……	That is

[32~33] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
32. Many people believe that they will be free of their anger if they express it, and that their tears will release their pain. This belief derives from a nineteenth-century understanding of emotions, and it is no truer than the flat earth. It sees the brain as a steam kettle in which negative feelings build up pressure. But no psychologist has ever succeeded in proving the unburdening effects of the supposed safety valves of tears and anger. On the contrary, over forty years ago, controlled studies showed that fits of anger are more likely to intensify anger, and that tears can drive us still deeper into depression. Our heads do not resemble steam kettles, and our brains involve a much more complicated system than can be accounted for by images taken from nineteenth-century technology.
① 감정에 따른 두뇌 반응의 상이성
② 두뇌 구조와 우울증의 관계
③ 19세기 과학이 뇌신경학에 미친 영향
④ 감정 표출의 효과에 대한 오해
⑤ 눈물과 분노의 심리적 유사성

33. Knowing when something happened is important. Understanding why historic events took place is also important. To do this, historians often turn to geography. Weather patterns, the water supply, and the landscape of a place all affect the lives of the people who live there. For example, to explain why the ancient Egyptians developed a successful civilization, you must look at the geography of Egypt. Egyptian civilization was built on the banks of the Nile River, which flooded each year, depositing soil on its banks. The rich soil could help farmers grow enough crops to feed the people in the cities. That meant everyone did not have to farm, so some people could perform other jobs that helped develop the civilization.
① effects of the Nile River on Egyptian farming
② significance of geography in understanding history
③ differences between geography and geology
④ varieties of Egyptian civilization
⑤ development of Egyptian culture


34. 다음 글의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Nowadays, we can enjoy athletic competition of every kind without leaving our homes. It is the fun that comes from cheering on our team and celebrating its skills while complaining about the opposing team’s good luck. But some individuals sit and watch a football game or tennis match without cheering for anyone or any team. They are not willing to risk the possible disappointment of picking the loser, so they give up the possible joy of picking the winner. They live in the world of neutrality. Don’t be one of them. Sure, your team might lose. But then again, your team might win. Either way, your spectator experience will have been a fun one, and you will have avoided being merely a passive observer.
① 상대 팀의 승리에 찬사를 보내라.
② 한 팀을 정해서 응원하며 관전하라.
③ 운동경기는 경기장에 가서 즐겨라.
④ 중립적인 입장에서 경기를 분석하라.
⑤ 지나친 응원으로 상대 팀을 자극하지 마라.


35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?

The above graph shows changes in school enrollment rates of the population ages 3－19 by age group from 1970 to 2006. ①The enrollment rates of all age groups were higher than 50 percent in 2006. ②Of all age groups, the enrollment rate for youth ages 7－13 was the highest during the entire period covered by the graph. ③Of all age groups, the enrollment rate of children ages 5－6 increased the most from 1970 to 2006. ④The overall change in the enrollment rate from 1980 to 1990 was smaller for youth ages 14－17 than for youth ages 18－19. ⑤The lowest enrollment rate is seen in children ages 3－4 among all age groups for each year.
36. RPC에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? 
TheRPC,foundedin1996,describesitselfasa progressive organization fighting for social change. It is a multiracial, multi-issue, international membership organization. Its mission is to move the nation and the world towards social, racial, and economic justice. It has its headquarters inChicago,andmajorbranchesinWashington,D.C., New York, and Los Angeles. It has succeeded in registering hundreds of thousands of voters, helped elect many officials, mediated labor disputes, affected public policy in Haiti, and helped secure professional positions for minorities in a number of different fields. It also works on issues such as fair housing, gender equality, and environmental justice.
① 1996년에 설립된 보수 단체이다. 
② 임무는 인종 문제에 국한된다. 
③ 본부는 뉴욕과 로스앤젤레스에 있다.
④ Haiti의 공공 정책에 영향을 끼쳤다. 
⑤ 양성 평등과 환경 문제에는 관여하지 않는다.

37. sacred lotus에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? 
A water plant called the sacred lotus regulates its temperature in order to benefit insects that it needs to reproduce. When the plant flowers, it heats its blossoms to above 86℉ for as long as four days. It does so, even when the air is as cool as 50℉. The heat releases an aroma that attracts certain insects, which fly into the flower to feed on nectar and pollen. But according to Roger Seymour and Paul Schultze-Motel of Australia’s University of Adelaide, the heat does more: It rewards insects with a stable environment that enhances their ability to eat, mate, and prepare for flight. 
*nectar: (꽃의) 꿀   **pollen: 꽃가루
① 번식에 필요한 곤충을 이롭게 하기 위해 온도를 조절한다.
② 개화 시에는 꽃을 화씨 86도 이상까지 따뜻하게 한다.
③ 화씨 50도의 기온에서는 열을 내지 않는다.
④ 꽃의 열이 곤충을 유인하는 향기를 발산시킨다.
⑤ 꽃의 열이 곤충의 짝짓기 능력을 향상시키는 환경을 제공한다.

[38~39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. Old Hawk gestured up at the tall, old cottonwood. It was so large that a grown man could not put his arms around it. “This tree,” he said, “has stood guard over our family all its life. Strength is what I feel each time I look at it. Yet, there have been moments when its great strength was also its weakness.” “That’s hard to believe,” Jeremy said. “It’s the biggest tree for miles around.” Old Hawk pointed at the chokecherry trees in a dry river bed not far away. “Look there,” he said, “those chokecherry trees are small and weak in comparison to this cottonwood. But when you were a child, they survived a storm without losing a branch. This old cottonwood, on the other hand, lost several branches. It stood up to the storm, but it could not bend with the wind the way the chokecherry trees could.”
① 강한 것이 약한 것을 이긴다.
② 강점이 약점이 될 수도 있다.
③ 신념이 꿈을 실현시킨다.
④ 서식 환경이 나무의 용도를 결정한다.
⑤ 식물은 자연 재해를 막는 데 도움이 된다.


39. The specific combinations of foods in a cuisine and the ways they are prepared constitute a deep reservoir of accumulated wisdom about diet and health and place. In Latin America, for example, corn is traditionally eaten with beans; each plant is deficient in an essential amino acid that happens to be abundant in the other, so together corn and beans form a balanced diet in the absence of meat. Similarly, corn in Latin America is traditionally ground or soaked with limestone, which makes available a B vitamin in the corn, the absence of which would otherwise lead to a deficiency disease. Very often, when a society adopts a new food without the food culture surrounding it, as happened when corn first came to Europe, Africa, and Asia, people get sick. The context in which a food is eaten can be nearly as important as the food itself.
*limestone: 석회암
① 같은 종류의 채소라도 재배 지역에 따라 영양소가 다르다.
② 음식 문화의 전파는 문명의 전파 경로와는 관련이 없다. 
③ 지역 특산물 재배는 지역 경제 활성화에 도움이 된다.
④ 채소를 곁들인 육류의 섭취는 다이어트에 효과적이다.
⑤ 전통 음식 문화는 지역의 재료와 환경적 특성의 소산이다. 


40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? 

Now many kinds of superior coffee beans are being decaffeinated in ways that conserve strong flavor. But the public suffers from a groundless fear of chemical decaffeination and prefers instead to buy water-processed decaf.

(A)The solvent comes into direct contact with them, carrying the caffeine with it. The drained solvent is then mixed with water, and the caffeine is drawn out to be sold. 
(B)In the water process, however, no solvent touches the beans. After the beans are steamed, they are soaked in water, which removes the caffeine―along with all the soluble solids in the beans. The solution is drained off to a separate tank, where the caffeine is drawn out from it.
(C)Every process of decaffeination, whether chemical- or water-based, starts with steaming the green beans to loosen the bonds of caffeine. In the chemical process, a solvent circulates through the beans.
*solvent: 용매
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)
③ (B)-(C)-(A)	④ (C)-(A)-(B)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. Processing a TV message is much more like the all-at-once processing of the ear than the linear processing of the eye reading a printed page. According to McLuhan, television is fundamentally an acoustic medium. To make this point clear, he invited people to try a simple experiment. First, turn the sound down on the TV set for one minute during your favorite program. Now, for another minute, adjust the TV set so that you can hear the sound but you can’t see any picture. Which condition was more frustrating? Which condition gave you less information? McLuhan believed that people who tried this little exercise would invariably report more frustration in the condition where the picture was visible but the sound was inaudible.
① TV Messages: More Visual or Acoustic?
② Surveys of Favorite TV Programs
③ TV as Efficient Equipment for the Deaf
④ Effects of Advertisements on TV Viewers
⑤ More Frustrating Conditions: Invisible Situations

42. Most people have a vase or two in a cupboard, but lots of things can be turned into stylish containers for a flower arrangement, so before you rush out to buy anything, look around your own home. For instance, goldfish bowls look stunning filled with flower heads or petals, magnifying their contents. Wine, milk, mineral water, or olive oil bottles look particularly good with one or two stems in them. Try a collection of bottles in various shapes and sizes, lined up on a shelf or grouped on a table. An old teapot which has lost its lid becomes an ideal container for a bunch of roses picked from the garden.
① Flower Arrangements and Gardening
② Tips for Planting Flowers in the Garden
③ Decorating a Dining Table with Various Plants
④ Color: The Starting Point for Decoration
⑤ Ordinary Things as Flower Containers

43. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은? 
In Pamplona, a white-walled, sun-baked town high up in the hills of Navarre, is held in the first two weeks of July each year the World’s Series of bull fighting. The cafes under the wide arcades that run around the Plaza de la Constitucion have every table crowded. All day and all night there is dancing in the street. Bands of blue-shirted farmers circle and lift and swing behind a drum and various wind instruments in the ancient Basque Riau-Riau dances. And at night there is the beat of the big drums and the military band as the whole town dances in the great open square of the Plaza. 
① sad and desperate	② urgent and scary
③ merry and festive	④ gloomy and miserable
⑤ calm and peaceful
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

One grandmother hires her grandchildren to help with gardening chores.

Whether their grandchildren have special needs or not, grandparents shouldn’t overlook the value of incidental learning experiences. (①) Every day, opportunities exist in the form of errands, meal preparation, and chores. (②) At the farmers’ market, for example, a child might discover a new meaning for the word ‘ears’ when choosing corn. (③) Similarly, when filling the tank at the gas station, older children can compare prices and practice estimation, asking questions such as “How much do you think it will cost to fill the tank?” (④) As a result, they can learn the names of flowers and understand the tools and processes involved in growing vegetables. (⑤) Activities like these also enhance the value of hard work and persistence.


45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Everywhere in the world, the issue of how to manage urban growth poses the highest stakes, complex policy decisions, and strongly heated conflicts in the public area. The contrast between Western Europe and America is particularly sharp. In Western Europe, steep gasoline taxes, investment policies favoring built-up areas over undeveloped greenfields, continuous investment in public transportation, and other policies have produced relatively compact cities. Cities in Western Europe tend to be economically healthy compared with their suburbs. By contrast, in the United States, cheap gas, massive highway investment, policies that favor construction on the edges of cities, and heavy reliance on property taxes to fund public schools have encouraged much more car-reliant and spread-out urban areas, where eight in ten Americans now live. 
*stake: 위험 부담
󰀻
Different     (A)     resulted in relatively     (B)     
cities in Western Europe but resulted in spread-out urban areas in the United States.
           (A)  			  (B)
① public policies	……	centralized 
② transportation systems	……	decentralized
③ market demands	……	decentralized 
④ tax systems	……	decentralized 
⑤ economic capacities	……	centralized
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)One Saturday during the summer, I asked my father if he would go down to the schoolyard and play basketball with me. I had just finished the fifth grade, and wanted desperately to make the middle school team the coming fall. (a)I couldn’t believe my ears when he called for my mother and sister to come along, for, in the traditional fashion, my mother was the house accountant, the launderer, and, of course, the cook.
(B)She turned from the basket and began heading the other way. (b)“Um-mah,” I cried at her, my irritation already bubbling over, “the basket’s over here!” After a few steps she turned around, and from where the professional three-point line must be now, she effortlessly flipped the ball up in the air, its flight truer and higher than I’d witnessed from any boy or man. The ball curved cleanly into the basket, stiffly popping the chain-link net. All afternoon, she rained in shot after shot, as my father and I ran after her. 
(C)When we got home from the playground, my mother showed me the photograph album of her high school days. I was shocked to learn that she had been the top player for the national high school team that once won the all-Asia championships. (c)For years I kept it in my room, on the same shelf that housed the scrapbooks I made of basketball stars, with magazine clippings of great players such as Bubbles Hawkins, Pistol Pete, and George Gervin.
(D)When we arrived, my sister immediately ran off to the swings, and (d)I recall being annoyed that my mother wasn’t following her. I dribbled awkwardly around the free-throw line, almost losing control of the ball, and made a flat shot that bounced wildly off the basket. The ball fell to my father, who took a few not so graceful dribbles and missed an easy layup. (e)He rebounded his shot and passed the ball to my mother, who had been watching us from the foul line.
*layup: (골 근처에서 한 손으로 하는) 레이업 슛

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C)	② (C)-(B)-(D)
③ (C)-(D)-(B)	④ (D)-(B)-(C)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)

47. 위 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 필자 ‘I’는 새로 결성된 중학교 농구팀 대표 선수였다. 
② 필자 ‘I’의 어머니는 대부분의 슛을 실패했다.
③ 필자 ‘I’는 어머니의 고교 시절 사진을 끝내 보지 못했다.
④ 필자 ‘I’의 어머니는 누이와 함께 그네를 탔다.
⑤ 필자 ‘I’의 아버지는 레이업 슛을 성공하지 못했다.
48. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 어머니에 대한 필자 ‘I’의 존경심이 가장 잘 드러난 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.

Some scientists have shown the practical power of looking at the world through ‘could-be’eyes. When a group of students were shown an unfamiliar rubbery object and told, “This could be a dog’s chewy toy,” they were later able to see that it might also be of use as an eraser when they made some pencil mistakes. In contrast, students who were told that it was a dog’s chewy toy did not find its alternative use. 
Another group of students watched a video about physics after being told, “This presents only one of several outlooks on physics. Please feel free to use any additional methods you want to assist you in solving the problems.” On tests of factual comprehension, these students performed no differently from students who had watched the video with a different introduction: “This presents the outlook on physics. Please use the method you see in the video in solving the problems.” But when they were faced with questions that asked them to use the information more creatively, the ‘could-be’ students performed much better than the others. Just a simple            of language seemed to invite the students to process and store information in a much more flexible format, and thus be able to look at it and make use of it in different ways.

49. 위 글의 밑줄 친 ‘could-be’eyes의 의미로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 인생에 대한 긍정적 시각	② 과거에 대한 성찰
③ 사물에 대한 열린 시각	④ 실수를 두려워하는 마음
⑤ 타인을 배려하는 마음

50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① memory	② criticism
③ definition	④ imitation
⑤ change