
2010학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지

제 3 교시       외국어(영어) 영역
 

성명


수험번호





3




                

◦문제지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 쓰시오.
◦답안지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 쓰고, 또 수험 번호와 답을 정확히 표시하시오.
◦문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을 참고하시오. 1점과 3점 문항에만 점수가 표시되어 있습니다. 점수 표시가 없는 문항은 모두 2점입니다.


1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.


1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 만들 가방의 디자인을 고르시오.

①

②



③

④



⑤








2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① amused	② jealous	③ bored
④ lonely	⑤ worried

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. [1점]

①

②
 
③




④
 
⑤
 






4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 헬멧 가져오기	② 자전거 꺼내 오기
③ 일기예보 확인하기	④ 바퀴에 바람 넣기
⑤ 안장 높이 조절하기

5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $320	② $330	③ $400	④ $420	⑤ $430
6.다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 도서관 이용 시간 변경을 공지하려고
② 새로운 도서관 명칭을 공모하려고
③ 학습실의 청결 유지를 호소하려고
④ 학습실 개방 사실을 홍보하려고
⑤ 도서관 폐쇄에 대해 항의하려고

7.대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 선생님께 전화하기	② 영수증 찾아 주기
③ 학교에 데려다 주기	④ 준비물 가져다 주기
⑤ 참가 동의서 작성하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
① 방송국	② 음식점	③ 사진관
④ 박물관	⑤ 면접시험장

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 미용사 - 고객	② 매니저 - 가수 
③ 지휘자 - 관객	④ 만화가 - 문하생
⑤ 운동선수 - 팬

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to shop around for a new bed
② to buy new dishes and furniture
③ to move the bed into her house
④ to take her son to a garage sale
⑤ to call a repairman to fix the bed

11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 관람할 공연을 고르시오.


Date 
Time 
Romeo 
&
Juliet
①
11 (Fri.)
7:00 PM
Jim Evans 
&
Betty Hart
②
12 (Sat.)
3:00 PM
Bill Edison 
&
Cindy Miller
③
12 (Sat.)
7:00 PM
Jim Evans
&
Betty Hart
④
13 (Sun.)
3:00 PM
Tom Brown 
&
Ann Scott
⑤
13 (Sun.)
7:00 PM
Bill Edison
&
Cindy Miller



12. York Gardens의 행사에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 4월 마지막 토요일에 개최된다.
② 튤립 축제는 오전 11시부터 오후 4시까지 진행된다.
③ 안내를 받으면서 정원과 온실을 구경할 수 있다.
④ 조류 관찰을 위한 출발 지점은 안내소이다.
⑤ 조류 관찰 행사에 참가하려면 예약을 해야 한다.

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.



①	②	③	④	⑤

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:                                                 
① It’ll be too hard for her, but we can try.
② I’d rather wear glasses than contact lenses.
③ Take it easy. The checkup won’t take long.
④ I’m glad that she’s recovered and come home.
⑤ Yes. She needs to take a painkiller sometimes.

15.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:                                              
① Okay. This one is really lucky today.
② Right. Fish will die in the dirty water.
③ Yes. It’s hard to measure a large fish.
④ Sounds great! I want to go fishing with you.
⑤ Yeah. I’ll tell Grandma to make dinner with this.

16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:                                                 
① Cheer up! I’m sure you can beat him.
② I think you can help him change his habits.
③ He should bounce the ball more than twice.
④ I can see it now. I think I can handle his serves.
⑤ I’m sorry to hear that he gave up tomorrow’s game.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Amber가 남자에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Amber:                                               
① Okay. Let’s stop and call it a day.
② No, thanks. I’ll go home to pick up mine.
③ Please use mine. I don’t need it right now.
④ Thank you for letting me use your mouse.
⑤ Really? Then, why don’t you buy one right now?




이제 듣기․말하기 문제는 다 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.



18. 밑줄 친 this가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
I used to hear Chopin, but recently I listen to Mozart because everybody says listening to Mozart’s music will make me smart. I also hear many stories including Aesop’s fables and Andersen’s fairy tales. My favorite story is “The Frog Prince,” and I’ve almost learned it by heart because I’ve heard it dozens of times. These days some stories are told in a foreign language, but I can’t understand them very well because the language is not my mother tongue. Apart from listening to music and stories, you will never know how many things I learn through this. Although I am still inside my mom and have never seen the world through my own eyes, I feel I’m quite familiar with the world outside thanks to this. I can’t wait to see the people who have been nurturing and communicating with me for nine months.
① 태교	② 명상	③ 독서
④ 조기 유학	⑤ 음악 감상



19. 밑줄 친 He[he]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
A salesman called on a young grocer named Barney, trying to sell him canned corn. The salesman was especially proud of the fancy label on the can. He said that the customers wouldn’t be able to resist it, so Barney decided to give the product a chance. ①He had a small kitchen at the rear of his store where he tested products. Walking to the back, ②he tore off the fancy label and deliberately threw it on the floor. “My customers don’t eat labels. They eat what’s inside,” ③he told the salesman, who was surprised and fell speechless. While ④he was waiting in fear, the young grocer opened the can―it was full of hulls! The grocer didn’t order the canned corn. Word spread and Barney gained the reputation that ⑤he sold products of good quality.                            *hull: 껍데기, 쭉정이
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I somewhat disagree with everyone saying Mr. Peterson’s class is boring and too demanding. I’ve had Mr. Peterson for StatisticsⅠandⅡ, andI can honestly say that he is detail-oriented and expects a lot from his students. But statistics is about details, facts, and effort among other things. If you’re looking for an easy A, think about taking an easier class; you won’t have to complain about homework or low grades. Mr. Peterson knows his stuff, has a lot of experience, and is very approachable. When I had him, I  didn’t get many poor remarks; on the rare occasions I did, it didn’t affect my grade. Overall, this is a class that will give you as much as you put into it.
① to decline a job offer
② to recommend a course
③ to hire a new professor
④ to ask for a quick reply
⑤ to complain about grading

21. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Bright sunlight filters through the ever-present playground dust. A group of children are playing baseball on the ground. In the distance, there is the faint sound of shouting, a crowd coming closer. Then the crowd bursts through the playground and makes for the airfield. The children see the crowd surging around the field and charging toward a landing helicopter. They also run for the helicopter. A famous movie star Bruce Rain gets out of the helicopter. A boy at the front of the crowd holds out his photograph and the movie star takes it and scribbles his autograph on it. He hands the photograph back to the boy as his bodyguards surround him and hustle him into a car.
① exciting and noisy	② tense and gloomy
③ calm and peaceful	④ warm and romantic
⑤ scary and frightening

22. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sleep deprivation has a great influence on the immune system. Consider what happens in public schools in December just before the winter break. Kids get sick. Teachers get sick. Parents get sick. We tend to think there are just a lot of viruses (A)go/going around. In reality, the main reason for these minor but unpleasant illnesses (B)are/is that we are exhausted. Students and teachers are all sleep-deprived from the constant stress of the first semester, and it begins to catch up with us. Our immune systems are not functioning as (C)effective/effectively as they do when we are well rested, and we get sick. What do most of us do when the winter break comes? We try to get caught up on sleep.
	(A)	(B)	(C)
① go	……	are	……	effective
② go	……	are	……	effectively
③ going	……	is	……	effectively
④ go	……	is	……	effectively
⑤ going	……	is	……	effective

23. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
It was Mary’s thirteenth birthday. It was also her first birthday at her uncle’s house. Everyone brought out gifts for Mary: stockings from Elena, a purse from Steve, and a pair of very old silver earrings from Chris, who said she ①had had them since she was a little girl. Uncle Jack gave a lengthy speech about ②how Mary was like a daughter to him and to Aunt Barbara. And then, he handed her an envelope in ③which was tucked a fifty-dollar bill. Mary was to buy ④herself some new clothes with Aunt Barbara’s help and advice. A miracle! So many presents and so much money all at once made her eyes ⑤shone. She wanted to kiss everybody.

[24~28] 다음 글의 빈 칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24.A speaker begins his presentation by reaching into his pocket, holds up a twenty-dollar bill, and says, “This twenty is for sale for exactly one dollar. Who wants to buy it?” Would you leap to your feet to get his attention? Or would you wait a few seconds, and after a hand or two goes up, timidly raise your own? If you’re one of the hesitaters, you’re normal. Once someone else is willing to take a chance, then our greedy little hands pop up, and we tend to go along. The faster others’ hands are raised, the greater the desire, and the more likely we are to be part of it. Our sense of the value of an object is reinforced by the                   that has been created for that object.
① demand	② design		③ brand
④ criticism	⑤ investment

25.Women have a more sensitive touch than men because of their        . A professor in McMaster University in Ontario, Canada and his team measured the surface areas of index fingers in 100 students and then asked them to feel surfaces marked with progressively finer grooves. When the grooves get too narrow for someone’s sense of touch, the surface feels smooth. On average, men could detect grooves down to 1.59mm wide, whereas women detected grooves at 1.41mm. The ability to discriminate the grooves on the surfaces fell by 0.25mm for every square-centimeter increase in finger area. The team found that sweat pores and the skin’s touch receptors are more densely packed as finger size decreases.		              *groove: 가늘고 긴 홈
① smoother skin	② larger pores
③ cleaner hands	④ thinner bones
⑤ smaller fingers
26.When you are taking an essay test,                 . Some experts or teachers must have spent quite a long time deciding them. Notice the key words. The words in them have been chosen with great care and mean precisely what they say. For example, if it asks you to ‘prove’ something, you should not ‘describe’ or ‘explain’ it. You might get a few marks even if your answers don’t focus on the word ‘prove’, but you certainly wouldn’t get full marks. Also, notice especially where the words are used in the singular and where they are used in the plural. If a question asks for ‘reasons’, one reason isn’t going to be enough. If it asks for ‘problems’, again one problem isn’t going to be adequate.
① read the questions carefully
② watch out for spelling mistakes
③ use your experience and knowledge
④ distinguish between facts and opinions
⑤ avoid the words used in the given text

27.During the Middle Ages, the Rhine River was a great European trade route protected by the Holy Roman Empire. Merchant ships paid a modest toll to safeguard their transit. However, after the Empire weakened during the thirteenth century, many freelance barons built castles on the Rhine and began collecting their own illegal tolls. Each argued that he had the rights to collect tolls. The growing number of these “robber baron” tollbooths made shipping unmanageable. Eventually, the merchants couldn’t afford the tolls. The river continued to flow, but boatmen would no longer bother making the journey. Because of the decreased trade, the European economic pie shrank. Wealth disappeared. As                           , everybody lost, even the barons themselves.                 *freelance baron: 독립적인 지방 호족
① collecting tolls was prohibited
② technology innovation did not occur
③ all power was concentrated in one person
④ too many people owned pieces of one thing
⑤ merchant groups gained power over the Empire

28.For the first year of sound film, it seemed that audiences would see any film that “talked.” When audience attendance dropped by 20 percent in the early part of 1929, however, film producers had to reexamine their product. Sound had made almost useless the techniques that directors had acquired through years of silent films. In effect, sound                          . For example, because the noise of the camera could be picked up by the sound system, the camera had to be encased in a large heavy soundproof box, which made the camera stationary. In addition, the actors had to use the microphones hidden on the set (in telephones, flower vases, etc.); they could never move away from the microphones. They often appeared rather odd as they stood speaking into a vase of flower. [3점]
① increased the cost of producing a movie
② attracted more people to movie theaters
③ forced movie actors to practice a lot more
④ undermined the motion of the motion picture
⑤ led producers to cast actors based on their voice

29. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

        Figure1        Figure2     Figure3       Figure4

30in.
25in.
30in.
17in.


Would you like to see birds and fish playing together? Secure two glass vessels having straight sides of the same ①height, one 25 inches in diameter (Figure1) and the other 17 inches (Figure2). The smaller is placed within the larger, the ②bottoms being covered with moss and aquarium decorations. Fill the space between the vessels with water. Cut a piece of copper screen into a ③circular form to cover the larger vessel, and hang a bird swing in the center (Figure3). Place the screen on top of the vessels so that the swing will hang in the center of the inner vessel. A ④weight should be placed on top of the screen, over the smaller vessel, to keep it from floating. Put your canary birds in the ⑤outer vessel and some goldfish in the water between the vessels. Now you have a small world where birds and fish seem to play together underwater (Figure4).

30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Decades ago, my high school chemistry teacher slowly (A)reserved/released hydrogen sulfide from a hidden container he opened just before we entered his classroom. A few minutes after we took our seats and he began his lecture, a foul odor filled the classroom, grabbing our attention. We groaned, laughed, and looked around for the offending source. We would have appeared (B)focused/unfocused to an outside observer entering our class at that time. However, this demonstration literally led me by the nose to follow his description of the diffusion of gases through other gases. During that class I was able to (C)process/block the information about gas diffusion through my senses and ultimately stored it in my long-term memory.
*hydrogen sulfide: 황화수소   **diffusion: 확산
	(A)	(B)	(C)
① reserved	……	focused	……	process
② reserved	……	unfocused	……	block
③ released	……	unfocused	……	process
④ released	……	unfocused	……	block
⑤ released	……	focused	……	process
31. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Scientists are looking into the seas in search of medicines that may work better, with fewer side effects, than conventional drugs. ①The ocean has already given us wonderful drugs derived from salmon, omega-3 fish oils for heart disease and bone replacements from coral. ②Another marine medicine in the works is a promising new cancer drug derived from bacteria that live inside a moss-like sea creature. ③Some fish farms tend to use several antibiotic drugs known to cause cancer to increase their production. ④Unlike conventional drugs that kill cancer cells, the drug makes them go back to normal cells. ⑤And some antibiotics being made from cells in fish may even be effective against antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
*antibiotic-resistant: 항생제에 내성이 있는

32. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
As a member of the Teen Council, I had to speak to the Community Council to support building an ice skating rink in our community. The audience was made up of many parents and some young people, most of whom I knew. I did not focus on my friends’ concerns for fun. 　  (A)  　, I talked to the people who would make the decision―the parents. To address their concerns about safety I discussed the security that comes from knowing where a child is, the presence of a professional rink staff, and the careful selection of rules for using the rink safely. 　  (B)   , I explained that the price of admission will be relatively low, as will the rental and maintenance fees. The result exceeded my expectation. Everybody agreed.
	(A)	(B)
① Instead	……	In addition
② Instead	……	However
③ Therefore	……	In addition
④ Therefore	……	However
⑤ Similarly	……	However

[33~34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33.Flying off to a foreign country for affordable cosmetic surgery has been a popular option for years. But now, because of rising health care costs, travelers are going abroad for routine surgeries and procedures. By 2012, experts predict, medical tourism will turn into a $100 billion international industry with more than 780 million patients seeking health care abroad. The line between vacation and health care will continue to blur. Next year Singapore will open Asia’s first medical hotel, a 260-room luxury high-rise connected to the east wing of the new hospital in Farrer Park. The hotel will feature a 500-seat conference hall, indoor and outdoor gardens, and a spa, as well as various medical equipment for patients who don’t want to stay in the hospital. It will add new meaning to the concept of a healing holiday.
① 의료 장비의 현대화
② 의료 관광 산업의 발달
③ 여행과 질병 확산의 관계
④ 싱가포르 관광 산업의 성공 요인
⑤ 경기 침체가 관광 산업에 미치는 영향


34.We conducted research to find whether people explain what happened to them positively or negatively. We gave questionnaires to one hundred children and their parents. The findings showed that the mother’s level of optimism and the child’s level were very similar. This was true of both sons and daughters. We were surprised at the result that neither the children’s speaking style nor the mother’s style bore any resemblance to the father’s style. This tells us that young children listen to what their primary caretaker (usually the mother) says. If the child has an optimistic mother, this is great, but it can be a disaster for the child if the child has a pessimistic mother.
① the way to improve active listening skills
② the relationship between gender and speaking style
③ the importance of sharing experience in the family
④ the role of questionnaires in psychological research
⑤ the influence of the mother’s speaking style on the child


35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?



The above graph shows how many hybrid and electric vehicle patents the world’s top seven companies got from 2002 to 2008. ①There are four Japanese companies, two US companies, and one South Korean company in the list. ②Two out of the seven companies were each assigned more than one hundred patents from 2002 to 2008. ③Though Company B ranked second during the period from 2002 to 2007, it ranked first in 2008. ④Company F from South Korea ranked sixth during the period from 2002 to 2007, but it ranked fourth in 2008. ⑤Company A was assigned more than six times as many patents as Company F during the period from 2002 to 2007, but the two companies received the same number of patents in the year 2008.
36. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

In fact, the men were unaware that the bill displayed a photo of the king of Thailand.

When their ship landed in Thailand, two US sailors took a tour of Bangkok. (①) As they stopped at a street corner, they saw some paper money on the ground and stepped on it to keep it from blowing away. (②) Seeing it, two uniformed Thai police officers at the same intersection ran to the sailors and arrested them. (③) According to the US officer who arranged to set the sailors free, the sailors had to apologize to the police. (④) The Thais consider him sacred, so stepping on his image is unforgivable and a serious crime. (⑤) To avoid such a problem when you are traveling in Thailand, you should be aware how deeply the people respect the royal family.

37. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
For the past two decades, illustrations in children’s books have become increasingly detailed and obtrusive, while language has become lessened―sometimes to the point of extinction. It is not unusual for a book of thirty or more pages full of repetitive phrases. The artwork is often marvelous, but the pictures make the language redundant, and the children have no need to imagine anything when they read such books. Looking at a picture actively prevents children younger than nine from creating a mental image, and can make it difficult for older children. In order to learn how to read and comprehend, they need to practice making their own meaning in response to text. They need to have their innate powers of imagination trained.
① 읽기와 쓰기 교육은 취학 후 시작해야 한다.
② 아동용 도서에서 그림의 비중을 줄여야 한다.
③ 아동용 도서의 그림은 사실적으로 그려야 한다.
④ 상상력을 키우기 위해 청각적 효과를 사용해야 한다.
⑤ 아동에게 상상력을 자극하는 그림을 많이 보여주어야 한다.

38.Adair Paul Neal에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Adair Paul Neal was usually called “Red Adair.” The nickname “Red” was a natural nickname because of his red hair, and it became his trademark. Born in Houston, Texas in 1915, he grew up in poverty. He dropped out of high school to help support the family. Adair held various jobs including seven years of work in the oil fields before he went into the army. After the war, Adair went to work for a company fighting oil well fires. Fearless, he became famous. He was called out to fires all over the world, including war zones, because of his company’s experience and expertise. Hollywood noticed and based a feature film on Adair’s life starred by John Wayne in 1968. Adair was seventy-nine years old when he finally retired from firefighting in 1994.
① 머리색과 관련된 별명을 갖고 있었다.
② 가정 형편 때문에 고등학교를 중퇴했다.
③ 군 입대 전 유전에서 일한 적이 있다.
④ 전쟁 지역 화재 진압에 참여했다.
⑤ 할리우드 영화에 출연했다.





39.Nepenthes attenboroughii에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
In 2007 scientists discovered a very strange flesh-eating plant. This plant, called Nepenthes attenboroughii, is so large that it can swallow and devour rats whole. They are lured into its slipper-like mouth to drown or die of exhaustion before being slowly dissolved by digestive enzymes. The plant is green and red and has a stem that can grow up to four feet long. It can only be found high up on the windswept slopes of Mount Victoria in the Philippines. After hearing of missionaries who had seen “whole rats” being eaten by the shrub, botanists Stewart McPherson and Alistair Robinson led a team of scientists to the Asian nation and uncovered the rare species. This plant was named after the naturalist broadcaster David Attenborough.
① 쥐가 좋아하는 먹이를 제공한다.
② 소화액으로 먹이를 녹인다.
③ 줄기가 4피트보다 높이 자란다.
④ 필리핀 전역에서 발견된다.
⑤ 발견한 식물학자의 이름을 따서 명명되었다.





[40~41] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
40.While creating a statue, the artist depends on the appropriate lighting to develop the figure because the quality of the final product relies on the interplay between light and shade. So great attention should be paid to lighting when the finished work is displayed. If a light from a source is weaker or stronger than when the work was created, the effect that the sculptor intended may be lost. In painting, the light and shade give the image shape and solidity that cannot be altered by an external light in which it is displayed. When a sculpture is exhibited, however, the artist’s work is brought to life by light, and its character can be altered by the control of the light source.
① 미술 작품에 대한 평가는 시대에 따라 바뀐다.
② 조명을 이용한 설치 예술 작품이 증가하고 있다.
③ 미술 작품을 제작할 때는 빛이 큰 영향을 미친다.
④ 조각품의 손상을 방지하기 위해 촬영을 삼가야 한다.
⑤ 조각품은 제작 당시와 동일한 조명 아래에서 전시해야 한다.
41.Take a liter of rice and pour it all at once through a funnel and into an empty beaker. Note how long it takes. Next, take the same rice and pour it, not all at once, but in a smooth controlled flow and measure how long that process takes. Which liter of rice gets through more quickly? The second method takes nearly one-third less time. What seems slower is actually faster. Likewise, a study conducted at a jammed tunnel showed that when cars were allowed to enter the tunnel in the usual way, with no restrictions, the two-lane tunnel could handle 1,176 cars per hour. But in a trial, the tunnel authorities limited the number of cars that could enter the tunnel every two minutes to 44. The result? The tunnel now handled 1,320 vehicles per hour.
*funnel: 깔때기
① Walking can save time.
② Human nature seeks speed.
③ Freedom brings convenience.
④ Modest control improves efficiency.
⑤ Measuring methods can vary the results.

[42~43] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
42.All top performers know they cannot stand still for long. They always look for ways to improve. Tony Gwynn, the player who won three batting championships, says, “Once you think you’re where you want to be, you’re not there any more.” The greatest challenge we have as we become successful is never to rest on our success, never to feel like we’ve done it. The moment you feel like you’ve done it, that’s the beginning of the end. One of the best basketball players of the 1980s, Larry Bird, is another great example. In his off season, he works to keep improving his skills. One summer, for example, Bird lifted weights; another summer he made a court on his mother’s front lawn, just “to learn some new moves.”
① Ready to Say No?
② Top People Never Stop
③ You Are What You Dream
④ Once Losers, Now Winners
⑤ Sports: Pleasure or Money?

43.People are wrong to regard play as a frill. Marc Bekoff at the University of Colorado, studying play behavior in social animals such as wolves, coyotes, and dogs, concluded that play allows individuals to try out new things because they can make mistakes without penalty. “Play encourages taking reasonable risks,” he says. “It allows you to be flexible and creative.” The search for novelty and the desire for something fresh is a hallmark of the state of play. And of course novelty and freshness are also central to creativity. At the very least, then, we should equip the next generation for the inevitable recessions of the future by encouraging water fights and inviting imaginary friends to join in.
① Be More Playful	② Admit Your Weaknesses
③ Change Your Habits	④ Do Important Things First
⑤ Be Patient with Your Children

44. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

An extraordinary successful and economical example of weed control can be found in Australia. Around 1787, a man brought the prickly pear, a kind of cactus, into Australia.

(A)To eliminate them, Australian scientists were sent to North and South America to study enemies of the prickly pears. After trials of several species, three billion eggs of an Argentine moth were spread in Australia.
(B)Some of the prickly pears escaped from his garden. Having no natural controls in this new territory, they spread immensely, eventually occupying about sixty million acres.
(C)Seven years later, the dense growth of the prickly pear had been destroyed and the once uninhabitable areas reopened to settlement and grazing. The whole operation had cost less than a penny per acre.
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)
③ (B)-(C)-(A)	④ (C)-(A)-(B)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)

45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

The TRI was one of the most successful environment programs in American history. Its original goal was simply to require companies to report their toxic discharges, so that state and federal governments would know about existing practices. But to stimulate extensive reductions, the media placed a spotlight on the worst offenders, leading them to do much better. The worst industrial air toxic polluter in New York City, for example, was subject to an extensive media campaign, one that led to large-scale emissions reductions. Hundreds of local and national articles targeted “the top polluters” in relevant areas. The result was to create a kind of blacklisting. No company wanted to be ranked among the worst, which led to a 45 percent decrease of toxic discharges between 1988 and 1995.

󰀻

   (A)    pressure helped solve    (B)    problems.

	(A)	(B)
① Media	……	environmental
② Media	……	economic
③ Peer	……	economic
④ Consumer	……	cultural
⑤ Consumer	……	environmental
[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)South Pole explorer Ernest Shackleton never reached his goal of crossing Antarctica, but the circumstances that prevented him from reaching that goal pushed him to  achieve an even more amazing feat. In January 1915 Shackleton’s ship Endurance became trapped in ice off Antarctica. He and his crew of twenty-seven lived on the ship trapped in the ice for nine months until they had to abandon their ship when the ice crushed the boat.
(B)In addition, they had to hunt scarce seals and penguins for food, and were attacked by killer whales and sea leopards, which would rise through the ice in search of prey. Throughout this time, Shackleton demonstrated his leadership by rationing food, rotating use of the warmer sleeping bags, and keeping a calm, positive attitude that helped morale. He also showed great courage as he and five of his men crossed eight hundred miles of dangerous ocean to the nearest inhabited island to seek help.
(C)Despite no maps and terrible weather, Shackleton’s small boat reached the island, where Shackleton and an even smaller group organized a rescue party to retrieve the rest of his crew. Despite the perils of living in south polar waters for almost two years, all twenty-seven men eventually came back from the expedition. Shackleton never crossed the South Pole, but he completed the greatest task of bringing back all of his crew alive.
(D)The day the ship sank, Shackleton wrote his new goal: “The task is to reach land with all members of the Expedition.” The group camped on the ice for six months, until the ice broke up and they took small lifeboats to nearby uninhabited Elephant Island. During their time on the ice, boat, and island, Shackleton’s group had to endure temperatures as low as twenty degrees below zero and had no daylight from May to July.

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

47. 위 글의 밑줄 친 an even more amazing feat가 가리키는 내용으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 남극대륙을 최초로 횡단한 것
② 남극의 새로운 지도를 작성한 것
③ 자신의 공로를 탐험대원들에게 돌린 것
④ 탐험대원 전원을 살아서 돌아오게 한 것
⑤ 인간의 거주지를 남극대륙으로 확장한 것
48. 위 글의 Ernest Shackleton에 관한 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 지휘하던 배가 암초에 걸려 좌초했다.
② 대원들의 동물 사냥을 금지했다.
③ 대원들에게 침낭을 돌려가며 사용하도록 했다.
④ 남극대륙에서 대원들과 4년간 거주했다.
⑤ 부서진 배를 수리하여 Elephant 섬으로 갔다.


[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Arun was ten years old. He came from a poor family in India. He kept missing days in his government school. The teacher tried getting him interested in what the class was doing, but he was inattentive. She felt that he had a learning disability.
There was a group near school which helped children after school hours with homework and with revision of the day’s subjects. This ‘evening school’, near the slum where Arun lived, was asked by this teacher if they could spend more time with him and find out why he missed school and was so inattentive. After six months (Arun went regularly to this evening school, never missing a day), the helper there said that Arun assisted his father in repairing bicycles and enjoyed this work. So, the evening school helpers began their program to         the government school education by starting with what Arun knew and liked: bicycles.
From that starting point, he learned about metals, about physics and chemistry, and he learned two languages. He then began to follow the lessons in his government school, and enjoyed studying and learning new things. Arun grew up to do well in his school-leaving examination, and is now at a university learning engineering―his main passion.

49. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① limit	② ignore
③ imitate	④ evaluate
⑤ complement


50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① The Origin of Formal Education in India
② The Importance of Cooperative Learning
③ Revision: The Secret of a Successful Student
④ The Result of Learning with No Competition
⑤ Education Focusing on Individual Learners’ Interests



※확인 사항
  문제지와 답안지의 해당란을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.


1
8
2010학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 사용할 표지판을 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① proud ② jealous ③ curious
④ worried ⑤ nervous
3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오.
① a cartoon ② a brochure ③ a headline
④ an editorial ⑤ a photograph
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to park her car
② to give him a ride
③ to fix the broken bicycle
④ to take his son to a doctor
⑤ to inform him of the repair expenses
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 선물 값으로 여자에게 주어야 할 금액을
고르시오. [3점]
① $18 ② $20 ③ $36 ④ $40 ⑤ $50
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 야생 동물 보호의 중요성을 강조하려고
② 동물 실험 윤리 강화에 대해 홍보하려고
③ 애완 동물 응급 처치 요령을 설명하려고
④ 여름철 애완 동물 관리 방법을 안내하려고
⑤ 동물 애호가 협회에 대한 지원을 촉구하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 친구에게 전화하기 ② 전화번호 알려주기
③ 전화기 수리 맡기기 ④ 휴대전화기 분실신고하기
⑤ 고객에게 메시지 전달하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 정육점 주인 ― 손님 ② 식당 지배인 ― 웨이터
③ 음식점 주인 ― 배달원 ④ 비행기 승무원 ― 승객
⑤ 학교 영양사 ― 조리사
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
① 운동화 빨래방 ② 구두 수선점 ③ 발 전문 병원
④ 기차역 매표소 ⑤ 디자인 학교
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 박물관 방문하기 ② 사진기 찾아오기
③ 도시락 주문하기 ④ 건전지 교환하기
⑤ 아침 식사 준비하기
11. 다음 일정표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 보게 될 경기를
고르시오.
12. 다음을 듣고, Community Service Award에 관한 내용과
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 올해의 시상은 졸업한 선배가 한다.
② 지원 자격은 지역 사회봉사 40시간 이상이다.
③ 자기 자신뿐만 아니라 친구도 추천할 수 있다.
④ 지원서는 학교 홈페이지에서 내려 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 지원서 제출 마감일은 5월 6일이다.
제 3 교시
2 외국어(영어) 영역
2
8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: ____________________________________________ ① Okay. I’ll tell Jane to fill in for you.
② Great! She’d love to take the position.
③ I promise I’ll consider your resignation.
④ Good, but you should withdraw your resignation.
⑤ Thank you. I’ll find someone as soon as possible.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman: _________________________________________ ① Probably not. He needs all the rest he can get.
② I don’t think he can. His plane is arriving soon.
③ No. He didn’t say anything when he left this morning.
④ Of course, he can. He should be at the theater by now.
⑤ He already left to buy flowers for your performance.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: ____________________________________________ ① You need to learn to motivate your students better.
② Please make sure to turn in your homework today.
③ That’s exactly what I need. So how do I join?
④ Welcome. What activities would you like to sign up for?
⑤ My group members have been very cooperative with me.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Michael이 Sam에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Michael: _________________________________________ ① How about joining a health club?
② Lucky you! I wish I could be like you.
③ You look tired. You should stop working out.
④ Be patient. Everyone’s progress is different.
⑤ Do you want to be my workout partner?
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제
지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This started as early as 8000 B.C. During the New
Stone Age as people began to settle into fixed
agricultural communities, this intensified. Originally raised
mainly for their meat, sheep and goats became valuable
also for their milk and wool. Cattle were domesticated
both for meat and skin and as work animals for
agriculture. Their milk production was not a factor until
much later in history when breeding for high milk
production produced suitable cows. Horses were also
domesticated and became important for transportation and
came to play a major part in warfare.
① 축산 ② 조경 ③ 수송 ④ 임업 ⑤ 수렵
19. 밑줄 친 She[she]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? [1점]
A woman stopped at a flower shop to order some flowers to
be wired to her mother who lived 100 miles away. As ①she
got out of her car, she noticed a girl sitting on the street
sobbing. The woman asked the girl what was wrong and she
replied, “I wanted to buy a red rose for my mother, but I only
have 75 cents and a rose costs two dollars.” ②She smiled and
said, “Come on in with me. I’ll buy you a rose for your
mother.” ③ She placed her order of flowers to her mother and
bought a rose for the girl. As they were leaving, she offered
the girl a ride. ④ She responded, “Yes, please, if you could.
Take me to my mother.” The little girl directed her to a
grave and placed the rose on it. This changed the woman’s
plan! ⑤ She returned to the flower shop, canceled the wire
order, picked up a bouquet of fresh roses, and drove 100
miles to meet her mother.
20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Mr. Brown wanted his students to learn math in the
context of real life. He felt it was not enough for them
just to work out problems from a book. To show his
students how math could really help ① them, he held
several contests during the year. The contests allowed his
students ② to have fun while they practiced math and
raised money. Once he filled a fishbowl with marbles,
asked the students to guess how many marbles there
were, and ③ awarded a free lunch to the winner. Another
time they entered a contest to guess how many soda cans
the back of a pickup truck ④ was held. To win, they
had to practice their skills at estimating, multiplying,
dividing, and measuring. They used ⑤ most of the prize
money for an end-of-the-year field trip.
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
It is hard for street trees to survive with only foot-square
holes in the pavement. The average life of a street tree
surrounded by concrete and asphalt (A) is / are seven to
fifteen years. Many factors underground determine if a
street tree will make it. If the soil is so dense that the
roots cannot get in, it will surely die. If they can get in,
there is a better chance of getting the water and nutrients
(B) needing / needed to survive. Another question is whether
adequate water supplies are getting into the growing area.
Some of the water comes from underground sources and
some from rain, and it is hard to measure (C) where / what
the tree is getting it. Of course, if the roots get into the
sewers, they can get everything they need.
(A) (B) (C)
① is …… needing …… where
② is …… needing …… what
③ is …… needed …… where
④ are …… needing …… where
⑤ are …… needed …… what
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
If you lead a busy life and are short of time, you may
find that you are eating a full meal only about once a day.
① From the standpoint of health this is a bad practice. ② You
would be treating your body with more consideration if
you had several small meals instead of a single big one.
③ A given amount of food is used more efficiently by the
body if it is spaced throughout the day rather than eaten at
one sitting. ④ Such symptoms are likely to occur in people
who drink more than five cups of strong black coffee in a
single day. ⑤ People who have large, infrequent meals tend
to gain more weight and to have a higher level of fat in the
blood than do those who eat smaller quantities (but the
same total) at regular intervals.
[23～27] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
23. We push down our feelings because most of us have
been brought up to believe that there are feelings which are
unacceptable. Some of us learned that all emotions are
unacceptable, while others learned that specific emotions
such as anger or crying are unacceptable. In fact, there is
absolutely nothing wrong with any kind of feeling. When
someone tells you not to feel sad or angry, he or she is
asking the impossible. You can deny the feelings you are
having but you cannot stop them from coming. All that
feelings need, in order to pass, is to be acknowledged and
accepted. Just saying to yourself, or someone else, ‘I feel
angry’ (or sad, or frightened) is a great start. Let yourself _________ the feelings, good or bad.
① deny ② hide ③ respect
④ choose ⑤ distinguish
24. Human beings direct their activities toward the
satisfaction of physical wants and general well-being.
They avoid, whenever possible, situations that may bring
about physical deprivation, including pain, hunger, and a
need for sleep. Much contemporary advertising promises
these satisfactions, whether from headache remedies,
fancy foods, or form-fitting mattresses. An individual
can suffer any of these deprivations temporarily, however,
and he may knowingly enter into situations which will
deprive him for a time if he believes that there will be _________________. The willingness of astronauts to
undergo periods of intense training is at least partially
explainable in terms of the great rest that they know will
come at the end of their missions. [3점]
① creative advertising ② physical contact
③ ultimate satisfaction ④ emotional imbalance
⑤ mental illness
25. No matter how we shake or tap the bottle of ketchup,
some of it refuses to come out. In some cases, up to 20
percent of the product is left in the packaging when it
is thrown out. This is not only annoying for consumers
but also poses difficulties when recycling: The leftovers
first have to be removed from the packaging, which is
expensive, time-consuming, and uses a great deal of
water. A German project by the Fraunhofer Institutes,
together with Munich University of Technology and
various industrial partners, will put an end to this dilemma.
Researchers are applying thin films, no more than 20
nanometers thick, to the inside surface of packaging in
order to _____________________. ① keep ketchup fresh ② remove tap water
③ develop nanotechnology ④ reduce leftover traces
⑤ increase the price of ketchup
26. When we have made an error, as for example in
adding up a column of figures, we have a tendency to
repeat it again and again. This phenomenon is known as
the persistent error. The same thing happens when we try
to solve a problem; each time our thoughts take a certain
course, that course is more likely to be followed the next
time. The reason that we keep making the same error
repeatedly is that associations form between the ideas in
the chain of thoughts and become firmer each time they
are used, until finally the connections are so well
established that ___________________________________. Thus, once we have adopted an unprofitable line of
thought, it is harder to adopt a profitable line.
① the chain is very difficult to break
② persistent problems are solved automatically
③ the ideas lose their associations with one another
④ those connections become weaker as time goes by
⑤ the phenomenon will lead to a profitable line of thought
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4
8
27. About three percent of the weight of sea water is accounted
for by salt. The salt content of the ocean is being continually
added to by runoff from the land, but it is not increasing. Yet
salt cannot leave the sea by evaporation because the water
vapor leaves it behind. So for many years it was a mystery as
to why the sea should ________________, given the rate of
runoff, and particularly if the world was supposed to be
hundreds of millions of years old. The riddle was not solved
until the 1970s, when the deep ocean openings were
discovered. Sea water is swallowed up by these cracks in the
ocean bed; when it reemerges, millions of years later, as steam
from volcanoes, the salt has been filtered out of it on its
passage through the rocks.
① be so deep and large
② create so much runoff
③ have so little salt in it
④ have so many volcanoes
⑤ keep its temperature so steady
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
A blind spot is not the same as a simple lack of knowledge.
A blind spot emerges from a (A) resistance / connection to
learning in a particular area. At the root of many of our blind
spots are a number of emotions or attitudes ―fear being the
most obvious, but also pride, self-satisfaction, and anxiety. A
manager, for example, might have unsurpassed knowledge
in the financial field, but her understanding of people
management might be (B) flooded / limited . Her people find
her cold and aloof and want her to become more consultative
and involved with the team. She, however, is not willing to
accept feedback about her management style and refuses to
even consider the (C) prospect / retrospect of changing her
management style.
*
aloof: 냉담한
(A) (B) (C)
① resistance …… limited …… prospect
② resistance …… flooded …… retrospect
③ resistance …… limited …… retrospect
④ connection …… flooded …… prospect
⑤ connection …… limited …… retrospect
29. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I start my long journey with great enthusiasm. The
thought of conquering the mountain stirs me with
anticipation. Although the freezing wind pounds upon me,
I feel flushed with warmth. Just after ten o’clock in the
morning, I finally put my step on the ice-covered peak of
the mountain. A childlike joy spreads through me. I am
the two hundred and ninth person to stand on the summit
of Mount Everest. My heart races as I take in this
glorious moment. The sky is deep blue and cloudless. For
fifteen minutes I cherish the view as the highest person
on earth. I do not feel the tiredness in my legs, for the
journey has been truly worthwhile.
① irritated and nervous ② cold and indifferent
③ anxious and gloomy ④ excited and satisfied
⑤ touched and sympathetic
30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절
하지 않은 것은?
 Downhill Cross-country
The figure above shows the equipment for downhill and
cross-country skiing and their recommended sizes. As you
can see, the downhill ski is ① shorter and wider than the
cross-country ski and is about the height of the skier. The
cross-country ski meets the ② elbow when the arm is held
above the head. In either case, a slightly heavier or more
experienced skier might want a longer ski, and a lighter or
beginning skier might prefer a shorter ski. The cross-country
pole is longer than the one for downhill skiing, and its tip is
③ bent. The length of the cross-country pole reaches the
armpit. The downhill pole fits comfortably in the hand about
two inches ④ below the armpit. The bottom of the downhill
boot attaches completely to the ski, while the ⑤ heel of the
cross-country boot is not fastened to the ski.
* armpit: 겨드랑이
31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Early photography continued the trend toward the
imprisonment of the subject and the object of representation.
During photography’s first decades, exposure times were
quite long. (A) , the daguerreotype process required
exposures of four to seven minutes in the sun and from
twelve to sixty minutes indoors. Early photographs
represented the world as stable, eternal, and unshakable.
And when photography ventured to represent living
things, they had to be immobilized. (B) , portrait
studios universally employed various holding devices to
assure the steadiness of the sitter throughout the lengthy
time of exposure. The devices firmly held the person in
place. In other words, a person who wanted to see his own
image became a voluntary prisoner of the machine.
* daguerreotype: 은판(銀板) 사진술
(A) (B)
① For instance …… Instead
② For instance …… Thus
③ Otherwise …… Thus
④ Otherwise …… Instead
⑤ Otherwise …… However
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
[32～33] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
32. Sometimes all a good cheese needs to stop it from going
bad is a sympathetic ear. Researchers in France have come
up with an ultrasonic sensor that will listen to cheese as it
matures and warn cheese makers of defects. Cheese makers
have to downgrade up to one-fifth of their produce because
of undetected faults. If the new device works well, that
problem could be reduced. The technique involves sending
a low frequency ultrasonic signal through the cheese to a
sensor at the other side. By measuring the change in the
speed and size of the emerging signal, the moisture and
porosity of the cheese can be mapped.
* porosity: 물질의 내부에 작은 구멍이 많은 성질
① 치즈 생산량 감소의 원인 탐색
② 국가별 치즈 생산 방법의 특징
③ 치즈 숙성에 필요한 시간과 습도 조절
④ 치즈 영양 분석을 위한 초음파 이용 방법
⑤ 초음파 감지기를 이용한 치즈의 결함 탐지
33. Nobody likes performance reviews. Employees are
nervous they will hear nothing but criticism, and bosses are
nervous their direct reports will respond defensively. So
people generally keep their mouths shut. That is unfortunate
because most employees need help figuring out how to
improve their performance and advance their careers. Also,
it can be harmful to the company if a lack of clear feedback
leads to undesirable work behaviors. There is a way to avoid
this problem. Managers can help employees learn adaptive
techniques ― like acknowledging negative emotions and
reframing fears and criticisms constructively ― to prevent
destructive responses. Once people are comfortable asking for
feedback, they will begin to see how they are doing relative
to management’s priorities, and their work will be more in
line with organizational goals.
① necessity of a feedback-friendly working environment
② improvement of working conditions for new employees
③ importance of roles of management in employee placement
④ development of upper-level management training programs
⑤ significance of a feedback analysis of the welfare policy
34. 다음 글에서 작곡가에 관한 필자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Composers describe their private world through the use of
sound. Making such a description concrete and detailed
requires not just inspiration but certain practical tools and
skills. No matter what style of music you write, you need to
understand dynamics and speed, the uses of harmony and
rhythm. You also need to know the range and capabilities of
instruments, the possibilities of the human voice, and the
problems of acoustics. You need to be able to devise a
blueprint that communicates to your musicians what it is you
want to hear. A young composer who takes a shortcut in this
technical training in his rush to play the role of a composer
will dry up very fast. If you learn the proper techniques, then
the passion, if it is genuine, will come through.
① 연주자와 의사소통을 자주 해야 한다.
② 전문가로부터 작곡법을 배워야 한다.
③ 예술적 영감을 중요시해야 한다.
④ 악기의 제작 과정을 잘 알아야 한다.
⑤ 실질적인 음악 지식과 기법을 익혀야 한다.
35. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은? [3점]
Technology Use Among Students and Teachers in the U.S.
(%)
Groups
Technology Products
Kindergarten ~ Grade 3
Grades
4 ~ 6
Grades
7 ~ 12 Teachers
Desktop computer 58 60 82 93
Laptop computer 21 28 35 39
Cell phone 39 49 75 60
MP3 player 12 22 46 6
Video game player 53 55 61 3
The above table shows the differences in technology
product use on a weekly basis among grade groups of
students and teachers in the U.S. ① As the students go
up in grade group, the percentage of technology product
use also increases. ② The percentage of desktop computer
use is the highest, immediately followed by that of video
game player use by all three student groups. ③ With
respect to cell phones, 39% of the students in the
kindergarten to grade 3 group use them, whereas 49%
and 75% of the students in the grade 4~6 and 7~12
groups use them, respectively. ④ For desktop and laptop
computer use, the teachers show a higher percentage
than all three student groups. ⑤ The teachers have a
lower percentage of MP3 player and video game player
use than all three student groups.
36. Costa Rica에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Costa Rica means ‘rich coast’ in Spanish. It was
discovered in 1502 and named by Christopher Columbus,
who thought it might be a land rich with gold. However,
Costa Rica has no great mineral wealth. It has, instead,
rich soil and a moderate climate. While other Latin
American nations suffered exploitation from outside the region
and developed societies split by class conflict between
rich and poor, Costa Rica developed an agricultural
economy made up of numerous small farmers. There was
not great wealth, but what there was was spread evenly.
Costa Rica continued its unusual development after it
separated from Spain in 1821, becoming the first Latin
American country to abolish slavery. In 1889 the little
nation held the first free election in Latin America.
① 금을 비롯한 광물자원이 풍부한 나라이다.
② 토양은 비옥하지만 기후는 온화하지 않다.
③ 대규모 농장을 바탕으로 한 농업경제가 발달하였다.
④ 라틴 아메리카에서 노예제도를 폐지한 마지막 국가이다.
⑤ 라틴 아메리카에서 최초로 자유선거를 실시하였다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6
8
37. TLA에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
In the early 1960s, Jill Norris, the mother of two sons with
learning difficulties, began to exchange appropriate toys with
other families; out of this she founded the Toy Libraries
Association (TLA). The association opened toy libraries in
community centers, clinics, schools, public libraries, and
hospitals around the world. From these toy libraries parents
and children could borrow toys knowing that they have been
thoroughly tried and tested, not only for their play value but
also for safety. Over the years, the association has involved
leading professional educators and therapists, alongside
parents, in the production of numerous publications on specific
toys and aspects of play. In its early years, the association was
opposed by the toy industry because it was likely to reduce
sales of toys as children were borrowing them.
① 다른 가족과의 장난감 교환을 계기로 시작되었다.
② 세계 곳곳의 병원에 장난감 도서관을 세웠다.
③ 장난감 도서관의 장난감은 안전성 시험을 받았다.
④ 출판물 제작에 교육 전문가를 참여시켰다.
⑤ 초기에 장난감 업계로부터 환영을 받았다.
[38～39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. Clients send a steady stream of clues and messages through
their facial expression, body movement, and voice pitch.
Counselors need to learn how to read these messages without
distorting or overinterpreting them in order to establish and
maintain relationships with their clients. For instance, when
Denise says to Jennie, “It seems that it’s hard for you to talk
about yourself,” Jennie says, “No, I don’t mind at all.” But the
real answer is probably in her nonverbal behavior, for she
speaks hesitatingly while looking away and frowning. Reading
such clues helps Denise understand Jennie better. Our
nonverbal behavior has a way of ‘leaking’ messages about
what we really mean. The unplanned nature of nonverbal
behavior contributes to this leakage even in the case of highly
defensive clients.
① 상담가는 의뢰인과의 상담 기록을 잘 보관해야 한다.
② 상담가는 의뢰인의 대인 관계에 주의를 기울여야 한다.
③ 상담가는 의뢰인의 개인 정보를 유출하지 않아야 한다.
④ 상담가는 의뢰인의 비언어적 표현을 바르게 파악해야 한다.
⑤ 상담가는 의뢰인과의 신뢰 형성을 기본 원칙으로 해야 한다.
39. Sweeping statements have been made about the effect of
clothing on the behavior of a child. It has been said that a
child who is better dressed is better behaved, and that a child
who is dressed like a cowboy is louder than he is when
dressed in ordinary clothes. Clothing, however, might have a
temporary effect on the behavior of the child, but not a lasting
effect. That is, we would predict that a child who was dressed
in his best clothes and whose mother stressed that they were ‘best’ would be better behaved for a short period, but by the
end of the hour the child would have forgotten his clothes and
would be acting as he would in old clothes. Likewise, the child
who is dressed in a cowboy outfit might be very noisy while
playing cowboys for a brief time, but he might soon change
to another activity and be no more noisy than usual.
① 아이들은 활동하기에 적합한 옷을 선호한다.
② 어려서부터 단정한 복장을 습관화해야 한다.
③ 화려한 의상은 아이들의 행동을 제약한다.
④ 엄마의 취향이 자녀들의 옷 선택에 영향을 준다.
⑤ 옷이 아이들의 행동에 미치는 영향은 일시적이다.
40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
Due to this trade, the plant variety became widespread
in a region.
For thousands of years, farmers at harvest time have
selected seeds, cuttings, or tubers from superior plants to
save for the next planting. ( ① ) Farmers often protected the
stored seeds from insects or animals by sealing them in clay
pots or burying them in baskets covered with ash. ( ② )
They also often stored tubers in cold areas and either
replanted cuttings immediately or kept them dry until the
next planting time. ( ③ ) Farmers thus saved their genetic
stocks from season to season. ( ④ ) They could exchange
remaining stocks with neighbors or exchange them in the
local market. ( ⑤ ) Organized seed production, however, did
not begin until the early 1900s.
* tuber: (감자 등의) 덩이줄기
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. A study found that enrollment in physical education
classes was not related to academic achievement scores,
but involvement in vigorous physical activity was. Students
who engaged in vigorous activity outside of school at least
20 minutes per day, three days per week, were found to
have higher academic scores. Students in the physical
education class spent an average of only 19 minutes out of
a 55-minute class engaged in moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity. Given that this amount and intensity of activity in
physical education classes had no correlation to students’ academic achievement, whereas there was a significant
association between academic achievement and vigorous
activity outside of school, the researchers propose that there
may be a certain minimum level of activity necessary to
produce the potentially desirable effects.
* enrollment: 등록
① Intense Physical Activity: Healthy or Not?
② Physical Activity Levels and Academic Achievement
③ Academic Achievement and Amount of Study Time
④ How to Increase Enrollment in Physical Education
⑤ Student Health and In-class Physical Education
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
42. The tragic heroes in Shakespeare’s plays have free
will. They possess their own defects of character that
bring their downfalls. Macbeth is ambitious but weak;
Othello is jealous; Hamlet cannot make up his mind ― but
all three might have made themselves into better human
beings. Nothing outside themselves prevents them from
taking the right path as opposed to the wrong, or tragic,
path. On the other hand, for the heroes in Greek
tragedies where fate embodied in the oracles prevails,
there is no free will. The gods control a man’s destiny,
and one cannot fight the gods. Regardless of their
strength or wisdom, the heroes cannot control their own
future. That is why the heroes in Greek tragedies can be
compared to fish in the net.
* oracle: 신탁(神託)
① Types of Heroes in Shakespearean Tragedies
② Lack of Moral Messages in Western Tragedies
③ Influence of Greek Tragedies on Shakespearean Plays
④ Conflict Between Gods and Heroes in Greek Tragedies
⑤ Difference Between Shakespearean and Greek Tragic Heroes
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we look at the world and ourselves, we do it
through a set of filters. Think about what a filter is. A
filter is a mechanism that lets some things flow in but
screens other things out.
(A) Through them, we process and assign a weight and
meaning to every event in our lives. Some things
flow in, others are screened out, but everything is
affected: not just what we ‘see,’ but what we ‘hear’ and ‘believe.’
(B) Depending on what the filter is made up of, it can
also alter whatever is looked at or passes through it.
Sunglasses are a good example of a visual filter.
(C) But, obviously, I am not talking here about some
physical apparatus that we can put on and take off,
like a pair of glasses. In fact, the filters I am
mentioning are internal, mental, emotional, verbal,
and perceptual in nature.
① (A) - (B) - (C) ② (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (A) - (C) ④ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The descriptions of sound production have been
rewritten in this edition so as to update the theory on
which they were based and to provide better practical
advice regarding pronunciation problems. Several figures
have been redrawn in order to achieve greater accuracy
and clearer detail. The authors have tried to eliminate
traces of gender-biased attitudes wherever they were
detected, and a definite attempt has been made to balance
female and male references. The most significant kind of
change in the new edition, however, is the result of the
effort we have made to introduce more use of language
for real communicative purposes in the learning activities
suggested for students to carry out.
① 개정판의 주요 변화를 설명하려고
② 새로운 언어 학습법을 제시하려고
③ 새 책의 출판 일정을 안내하려고
④ 새로운 편집 규정을 통보하려고
⑤ 최근의 발음 이론을 소개하려고
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The introduction of the player piano in the United States
at the turn of the 20th century had been accompanied
by fairly critical comments. Player pianos produced
music mechanically through a set of instructions stored
on a music roll. Although proponents of the player piano
such as piano manufacturers and publishers of sheet
music thought that it would lead to ‘an almost universal
music education,’ many music teachers, musicians, and
composers opposed it. Opponents claimed that one could
copy sound, but not interpretation, and that mechanical
instruments reduced the expression of music to
mathematical systems. For this reason, they believed that
mechanized music lessened the ideal of beauty by ‘producing the same after same, with no soul, no joy, no
passion,’ and that the introduction of the player piano
would lead to the disappearance of amateur players.
* proponent: 옹호자

While some believed that the player piano would
provide a universal music education, others criticized its
(A) music from a(n) (B) viewpoint.
(A) (B)
① recorded …… economical
② repetitive …… commercial
③ harmonious …… conservative
④ mechanized …… artistic
⑤ artificial …… political
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8
8
[46∼48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Several years ago, we were asked to help with the
merger of two community volunteer groups, who wanted
to join together in order to establish an agency that
would have more influence and better financing than the
two separate agencies of the past. Both were rural
groups, which had traditionally and geographically been
separated by a range of mountains.
(B)
In leading the planning meetings of the two boards, he
carefully kept the groups focused on the long-range issues,
and convinced them not to look at the headquarters
question until the very end of the process. Once the
organizational structure was set, by-laws agreed upon,
and all the volunteers had actually merged, then the
headquarters site was decided on ― logically and easily,
as it turned out.
(C)
We worked with the two groups to help them set goals,
develop policy, and build an organizational structure.
Meanwhile, the young executive director, who saw a
successful merger as his primary responsibility, was
especially careful about one thing. On either side of the
mountain was a large town. Each of the former agencies
had its own board, a separate staff, and long-standing
regional ties. The executive director understood that the
question of where the new joint agency’s headquarters
would be was an important question as well as a potentially
explosive one.
(D)
By then everyone was so committed to the organization
and its goals that the headquarters question had become a
relatively unimportant, routine one. The executive director
of the merging agencies was primarily concerned about
the long-range good of the organization and the total
community. He used all his influence and persuasive
powers to make that a common focus, and the results
were successful.
46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
① (B) - (C) - (D) ② (B) - (D) - (C) ③ (C) - (B) - (D)
④ (D) - (B) - (C) ⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
47. 위 글 (C)의 밑줄 친 one thing이 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한
것은?
① 경제적인 지원 ② 본부 위치의 결정
③ 이사회의 회칙 제정 ④ 산간 지역의 개발
⑤ 직원들의 책임감 고취
48. 위 글이 시사하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 기업의 성장은 지역사회 발전에 도움을 준다.
② 조직의 화합을 위해 동호회를 활성화해야 한다.
③ 장기적 관점에서 본질적 문제 해결에 집중해야 한다.
④ 의사 결정을 할 때 소수의 의견을 존중해야 한다.
⑤ 개인의 잠재력 계발에는 인내가 필요하다.
[49∼50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
It was spring and some 6th grade boys at a suburban
elementary school were fooling around on the
playground. They had discovered a great new trick. One
of them would kneel down behind someone and the
other would push the person over. The trick worked
perfectly with (a) Anna. She fell over with ease. She
was hurt and crying. In the process (b) she had broken
her wrist. The yard duty staff sent the shaken boys to
the principal.
The principal began by saying that she understood that
they were playing and had not meant to cause serious
harm, but that, in fact, they had. She explained that the
girl would have to wear a cast for weeks and now lots
of ordinary things would be more difficult for (c) her. She pointed out that the girl played the flute and would
now not be able to play in the spring concert. By the time
(d) she finished, the boys were in tears and very sorry
for what they had done. The principal also suspended
the boys for a day, explaining to them that even though
she knew they were sorry and had not meant to cause
such harm, she believed suspension was necessary to
signal to everyone in the community the seriousness of
the situation. On their own, the boys brought (e) the girl
flowers and apologized for hurting her.
*
suspend: 정학시키다
49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Taking Responsibility for Your Actions
② Respecting Students’ Privacy
③ Importance of Self-respect
④ Roles of Family in Childhood
⑤ Negative Consequences of Suspension
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1 8
2011학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
 1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 연필깎이를 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① nervous ② frightened ③ envious
④ bored ⑤ furious
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 다양한 발성법 훈련의 필요성
② 신체 구조와 목소리의 관련성
③ 운동 전 근육 스트레칭의 장점
④ 노래하기 전 발성 연습의 중요성
⑤ 체력 단련이 발성에 미치는 효과
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수업 교재 찾기 ② 친구와 토론하기
③ 책상 정리 정돈하기 ④ 문자 메시지 보내기
⑤ 급우 만나 사과하기
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 받을 거스름돈의 액수를 고르시오.
① $2.00 ② $4.00 ③ $5.00
④ $6.00 ⑤ $9.00
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 말하는 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 엘리베이터 점검 지연을 사과하려고
② 주차 위반 차량에 대해 주의를 주려고
③ 지하 주차장의 차량 이동을 요청하려고
④ 지하 주차장 보수 공사에 대해 안내하려고
⑤ 지하 주차장 물청소 시간 변경을 알리려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① to go on a business trip
② to talk to the supervisor
③ to email his check-up results
④ to pick up the medical documents
⑤ to send the documents via regular mail
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
① 호텔 ② 독서실 ③ 레스토랑
④ 공항 환전소 ⑤ 전자 제품 매장
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 직장 상사 - 비서 ② 매표소 직원 - 관람객
③ 회의 진행자 - 토론자 ④ 관광 안내원 - 관광객
⑤ 항공기 승무원 - 탑승객
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 보고서 작성하기 ② 생일 선물 추천하기
③ 쇼핑 정보 제공하기 ④ 상품 가격 문의하기
⑤ 백화점 신용카드 찾기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 장소를
고르시오.
12. 어느 대학이 개설할 도자기 강좌에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 미술학과에서 제공하는 것이다.
② 초급반, 중급반, 고급반으로 구성된다.
③ 도자기 강의 경력이 5년 이상인 강사가 가르친다.
④ 학생들은 수료 후 도자기 전시회에 참여할 수 있다.
⑤ 재학생의 경우 재료비만 내면 수강할 수 있다.
제 3 교시
①
②
③
④
⑤2 외국어(영어) 영역
2 8
13. 다음 그림 속의 두 사람의 대화로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
①②③④⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
M: ______________________________________________
① You’d better go to see a doctor.
② We should check the lost and found.
③ You will take the jacket off sooner or later.
④ Let’s see if there is a store that sells jackets.
⑤ We should go buy a bigger suitcase right now.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
M: ______________________________________________
① Come on! Learning is more important than grades.
② I enjoyed your lecture. I’d like to take your class again.
③ That’s wonderful! Thank you for signing up for the class.
④ Right. I need to reconsider whether I should take her class.
⑤ I’m sorry about your grades. You can do better next time.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
W: ______________________________________________
① Will you be paying by cash or charge?
② Would you like me to gift-wrap your album?
③ Can you make a couple of copies of this document?
④ Could you wish your father a happy birthday for me?
⑤ Do you want me to check if our main store has one?
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Yumi가 교수에게 할 말로 가장 적
절한 것을 고르시오.
Yumi: ___________________________________________
① Could you tell me what I did wrong in the examination?
② Is it possible for me to take the exam on another day?
③ I wish my team had done better in the dance competition.
④ If you give me a chance, I promise to win the grand prize.
⑤ How can I become a member of the college dance team?
 이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
I was pleased to receive your letter requesting a letter of
reference for a Future Leaders scholarship. As your physics
teacher, I can certainly speak highly of your academic
abilities. Your grades have consistently been A’s and B’s
in my class. Since this is the first semester that I have had
you in class, however, I do not feel that I am the right
person to provide information on your leadership skills. I
would encourage you to request a reference letter from
those teachers with whom you have had the most
opportunity to demonstrate those skills. I am sure many
teachers would be willing to provide letters for you. Good
luck with your scholarship.
① 장학금 추천서 부탁을 거절하려고
② 뛰어난 학업 성취를 칭찬하려고
③ 물리학 강좌 수강을 안내하려고
④ 장학금 수혜 소식을 알려주려고
⑤ 장학금 신청을 권유하려고
19. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
There was a girl who grew flowers in New Jersey and
sometimes took flowers to customers on Staten Island. To get
there, ① she had to go over a bridge paying a toll of $2.50.
One day, as she was approaching the toll booth, she saw a
toll booth attendant who reminded ② her of her mother. As
she reached in ③ her pocket, she found she had no money
but a half dollar. Not knowing what to do, ④ she handed the
coin to her and asked nervously, “Want to buy a fresh red
rose?” The attendant looked surprised at first, but glancing
at the cars piling up behind her, she took two dollars from
her purse and rang it up on the cash register. “Yes, I’ll take
it,” ⑤ she said with a smile. “And I suppose the price is two
dollars even, right?”
20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
The phrase, ‘jack-of-all-trades’ is a ① shortened version
of ‘jack of all trades and master of none.’ It refers to those
who ② claim to be proficient at countless tasks, but cannot
perform a single one of them well. The phrase was first
used in England at the start of the Industrial Revolution. A
large number of efficiency experts set up shop in London,
③ advertising themselves as knowledgeable about every
type of new manufacturing process, trade, and business. For
a substantial fee, they would impart their knowledge to their
clients. But it soon became ④ evident that their knowledge
was limited and of no practical value. Doubtful industrialists
started calling these self-appointed experts ‘jacks of all
trades and masters of none.’ These experts are still with us,
and as a result so ⑤ does the phrase.
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3 8
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
Mr. Potter was sailing for Europe on one of the greatest
transatlantic ocean liners. When he went on board, he found
(A) another / other passenger was to share the cabin with
him. After going to see the accommodations, he came up to
the purser’s desk and inquired (B) if / that he could leave
his valuables in the ship’s safe. Mr. Potter explained that
ordinarily he never availed himself of that privilege, but he
had been to his cabin and had met the man who was to
occupy the other bed. Judging from his appearance, he
was afraid that he might not be a very trustworthy person.
The purser accepted the responsibility for the valuables and
(C) remarking / remarked, “It’s all right. I’ll be very glad to
take care of them for you. The other man has been up here
and left his valuables for the same reason!”
* purser: 선박의 사무장
 (A) (B) (C)
① another …… that …… remarking
② another …… if …… remarked
③ another …… if …… remarking
④ other …… if …… remarked
⑤ other …… that …… remarked
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Geothermal heat, generated inside the Earth, helps keep the
temperature of the ground at a depth of several meters at a
nearly constant temperature of about 10°C to 20°C. ① This
constant temperature can be used to cool and heat buildings
by using a heat pump. ② A heat pump contains a water-filled
loop of pipe, which is buried to a depth where the temperature
is nearly constant. ③ In summer, warm water from the
building is pumped through the pipe down into the ground,
since the underground temperature is lower than the air
temperature. ④ However, far more use is made of geothermal
energy for direct heat than any other source of energy. ⑤ The
water cools and then is pumped back to the building where
it absorbs more heat, and the cycle is repeated.
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Comparing yourself with others is natural and can be
motivational. However, too much of it leads to envy,
especially if you’re ungenerous toward yourself. Instead, try
measuring your present self against your past self. When I
asked a salesperson to map his sales performance, he was
amazed to see that he had achieved a 5% to 10% annual
increase in sales while at his firm. This made him feel more
self-confident and lessened his resentment toward his
colleagues. If you feel threatened every time a perceived
rival does well, remind yourself of your own strengths and
successes.
① 타인의 장점을 인정하자.
② 결과보다는 과정에 충실하자.
③ 타인을 통해 자신을 돌아보자.
④ 자신의 능력과 장점에 초점을 맞추자.
⑤ 자신의 감정을 통제하는 능력을 기르자.
24. 다음 글에 드러난 Michael의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Michael dared to look inside the window, but from the
deep shadow of the trees and the gloom within, he could not
clearly make out the objects within. Although every nerve in
his body cautioned otherwise, he slowly pushed open the
door. The door creaked as it swung back. As he carefully
took a step inside, the door slammed shut. Michael’s futile
attempts to open the door only increased his panic. He tried
to calm his thundering heart by repeating to himself, “I am
not afraid. I am not afraid,” but to no avail. He suddenly felt
an uneasy darkness consume him from within. He opened
his mouth to call for help, but his words failed him.
① sympathetic ② weary ③ horrified
④ disappointed ⑤ gloomy
[25～30] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
25. Errors and failures typically corrupt all human designs.
Indeed, the failure of a single component of your car’s engine
could force you to call for a tow truck. Similarly, a tiny
wiring error in your computer’s circuits can mean throwing
the whole computer out. Natural systems are different,
though. Throughout Earth’s history, an estimated 3 million
to 100 million species have disappeared, which means that
this year somewhere between three and a hundred species
will vanish. However, such natural extinctions appear to
cause little harm. Over millions of years the ecosystem has
developed an amazing ___________ to errors and failures,
surviving even such drastic events as the impact of the
Yucatan meteorite, which killed tens of thousands of species.
* meteorite: 운석
① connection ② intolerance ③ insensitivity
④ accessibility ⑤ subjectivity
26. Unlike deviance in other settings, deviance in sports often
involves ___________________ norms and expectations.
For example, most North Americans see playing football as
a positive activity. Young men are encouraged to ‘be all
they can be’ as football players and to live by slogans such
as “There is no ‘I’ in t-e-a-m.” They are encouraged to
increase their weight and strength, so that they can play
more effectively and contribute to the success of their
teams. When young men go too far in their acceptance of
expectations to become bigger and stronger, when they are
so committed to playing football and improving their skills
on the field that they use muscle-building drugs, they become
deviant. This type of ‘overdoing-it-deviance’ is dangerous,
but it is grounded in completely different social dynamics
from the dynamics that occur in the ‘antisocial deviance’
enacted by alienated young people who reject commonly
accepted rules and expectations.
① a disciplined control of the desire to avoid
② wasted efforts and resources in establishing
③ ambitious attempts to get independent of and free from
④ a traditional approach of matching slogans and mottos with
⑤ an unquestioned acceptance of and extreme conformity to
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4 8
27. Time pressure leads to frustration, and when we are frustrated
or experience other negative emotions, our thinking becomes
narrower and less creative. However, people are unaware of
this phenomenon and live under the illusion that when they
are experiencing time pressure, they are also more creative.
This explains why time pressure is pervasive and to some
extent accounts for the increase in rates of depression. We are
generally too busy trying to squeeze more and more activities
into less and less time. Consequently, we fail to enjoy potential
sources of happiness that may be all around us. To enjoy the
richness that life has to offer, ________________________.
① we need to take our time
② we should maximize our opportunities
③ we have to deal with depression wisely
④ it is necessary to explore some creative ideas
⑤ it is important to embrace even negative emotions
28. With no attempt there can be no failure and with no
failure no humiliation. So our self-esteem in this world
depends entirely on what we back ourselves to be and do.
It is determined by the ratio of our actualities to our supposed
potentialities. Thus, ________________________________.
This illustrates how every rise in our levels of expectation
entails a rise in the dangers of humiliation. What we
understand to be normal is critical in determining our chances
of happiness. It also hints at two ways for raising our
self-esteem. On the one hand, we may try to achieve more;
and on the other, we may reduce the number of things we
want to achieve. The advantages of the latter approach lie in
the following statement: To give up pretensions is as blessed
a relief as to get them gratified. [3점]
① the higher your expectations are, the more you will achieve
② self-esteem can be increased by lowering actualities
③ success divided by pretensions equals self-esteem
④ early failures in life may lead to happiness later in life
⑤ more supposed potentialities increase chances of happiness
29. For many people ‘nature’ is defined as a negative: It exists
where people do not. Nature lies outside the urban and
agricultural realms, in regions of Earth where natural
processes are unhindered. Nature is where fallen logs rot and
acorns grow, wildfires turn woodlands into meadows, and
barrier islands shift with the currents ― all without human
interference. By extension, this definition suggests that nature
is best protected by keeping humans far away, so that it can
continue to run itself. But there is a serious problem with this
view. If nature is defined as a landscape uninfluenced by
humankind, then __________________________. Prehistoric
peoples changed their surrounding ecosystems, whether by
installing orchards in the Amazon or by hunting many large
mammals to extinction in North America. And modern
humans are changing the global environment even more
profoundly, whether through planet-wide climate change, or
by the worldwide movement of synthetic chemicals through
the food chain.
① humans cannot exist without nature
② there is no nature on the planet at all
③ it deserves to be preserved at all costs
④ modern people owe much to their ancestors
⑤ humans are at the mercy of the forces of nature
30. The most obvious salient feature of moral agents is a
capacity for rational thought. This is an uncontested necessary
condition for any form of moral agency, since we all
accept that people who are incapable of reasoned thought
cannot be held morally responsible for their actions.
However, if we move beyond this uncontroversial salient
feature of moral agents, then the most salient feature of
actual flesh-and-blood (as opposed to ridiculously idealized)
individual moral agents is surely the fact that every moral
agent __________________________________ every moral
problem situation. That is, there is no one-size-fits-all answer
to the question “What are the basic ways in which moral
agents wish to affect others?” Rather, moral agents wish to
affect ‘others’ in different ways depending upon who these
‘others’ are.
① brings multiple perspectives to bear on
② seeks an uncontroversial cure-all solution to
③ follows the inevitable fate of becoming idealized in
④ comes with prejudices when assessing the features of
⑤ sacrifices moral values to avoid being held responsible for
31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
When it comes to food choices, young people are
particularly (A) vulnerable / immune to peer influences. A
teenage girl may eat nothing but a lettuce salad for lunch,
even though she will become hungry later, because that is
what her friends are eating. A slim boy who hopes to make
the wrestling team may routinely overload his plate with foods
that are (B) dense / deficient in carbohydrates and proteins to
‘bulk up’ like the wrestlers of his school. An overweight teen
may eat (C) greedily / moderately while around his friends
but then devour huge portions when alone. Few young
people are completely free of food-related pressures from
peers, whether or not these pressures are imposed intentionally.
* carbohydrate: 탄수화물
 (A) (B) (C)
① vulnerable …… dense …… greedily
② vulnerable …… dense …… moderately
③ vulnerable …… deficient …… greedily
④ immune …… deficient …… moderately
⑤ immune …… dense …… greedily
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
It is said that although people laugh in the same way, they
don’t necessarily laugh at the same things. If this is true of a
single community, it is even more true of people who live in
different societies, because the topics that people find amusing,
and the occasions that are regarded as ①appropriate for joking,
can vary enormously from one society to the next. Some styles
of humor with silly actions are guaranteed to raise a laugh
everywhere. But because of their reliance on shared assumptions,
most jokes travel very ②well. This is particularly ③noticeable
in the case of jokes that involve a play on words. They are
difficult, and in some cases virtually ④ impossible to translate
into other languages. Therefore, this is why people’s attempts
to tell jokes to ⑤foreigners are so often met with blank stares.
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5 8
33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many grocery stores give the shopper the option of paper
or plastic grocery bags. Many people instinctively say that
paper is less harmful to the environment ― after all, paper is
biodegradable and recyclable. (A) , most plastic is
manufactured using oil by-products and natural gas. Plastic
is not always easily or economically recyclable, and once
manufactured, plastic may last virtually indefinitely. Yet in the
United States, paper products are the single largest component
of municipal waste. Even though paper products may
theoretically be biodegradable, in most landfills, they do
not biodegrade. (B) , paper production emits air
pollution, specifically 70 percent more pollution than the
production of plastic bags. And consider that making paper uses
trees that could be absorbing carbon dioxide. The paper bag
making process also results in three times more water pollutants
than making plastic bags.
 (A) (B)
① In contrast …… Furthermore
② In contrast …… However
③ As a result …… Likewise
④ For instance …… Nonetheless
⑤ For instance …… Therefore
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. While predictions about the future are always difficult,
one can be made with certainty. People will find themselves
in large numbers of interactions where intercultural
communication skills will be essential. There are several
reasons for such prediction. Some reasons include increasing
amounts of contact brought on by overseas assignments in
the business world, the movement of college students
spending time in other countries, and increasing amounts of
international travel among tourists. Others relate to social
changes within any one large and complex nation: affirmative
action, the movement of immigrants and refugees, bilingual
education programs, and movement away from the goal that
ethnic minorities become a part of a ‘melting pot.’ Therefore,
it is essential that people research the cultures and
communication conventions of those whom they propose to
meet in the future.
* affirmative action: 소수민족 차별 철폐 조치
① predictions of social changes in other countries
② necessity of understanding intercultural communication
③ importance of good educators in a multicultural nation
④ limitations of communication conventions across cultures
⑤ methods of intercultural communication in the business world
35. A famous psychiatrist was leading a symposium on the
methods of getting patients to open up about themselves. The
psychiatrist challenged his colleagues with a boast: “I’ll bet
that my technique will enable me to get a new patient to talk
about the most private things during the first session without
my having to ask a question.” What was his magic formula?
Simply this: He began the session by revealing to the patient
something personal about himself ― secrets with which the
patient might damage the doctor by breaking the confidence.
As he was ‘maskless,’ patients began to talk about their lives.
They opened themselves up to him because he had become
an open-minded person himself, and openness evoked
openness. The same principle applies to all human relationships.
If you dare to take the initiative in self-revelation, the other
person is much more likely to reveal secrets to you.
① being frank with patients with serious illness
② opening up oneself to draw out the other person
③ need of confidentiality between doctors and patients
④ effects of a new treatment on psychological problems
⑤ rebuilding broken relationships between close acquaintances
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Familiarity of Five Social Media
The bar graph above shows the familiarity of the
respondents with five prominent social media in 2007 and
2008. ① According to the graph, the social media that was
the most familiar in 2007 was blogging. ② In the following
year, social networking became the most familiar social
media. ③ Video blogging, which was the least familiar social
media in 2007, showed the biggest increase in familiarity
among the three media that showed an increase from 2007
to 2008. ④ Wikis showed a bigger decrease in familiarity
than podcasting from 2007 to 2008. ⑤ In 2008, podcasting
and wikis were the least familiar social media.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6 8
37. 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
During the early 1980s, a team of Italian scientists carried
out a series of studies under a variety of circumstances on
the ticklishness of people. The researchers found that
people seem to have one foot that is more ticklish than the
other ― and for most people it is the right. The experiment
was repeated in 1998 using a special way that a pointed
nylon rod was stroked across the bottom of the foot three
times at intervals of a second. After applying it to thirty-four
people, the researchers confirmed the original finding and
pushed back the frontiers of knowledge still further by
showing that males were more ticklish than females. One
suggested explanation is that the left side of the brain,
which detects stimuli applied to the right foot, is associated
with positive emotions such as laughter.
① 1980년대 말에 이탈리아 과학자들이 간지럼에 대해 연구하였다.
② 양쪽 발이 똑같이 간지럼을 타는 것으로 나타났다.
③ 나일론 봉으로 무릎을 쓰다듬는 방식으로 실험이 재연되었다.
④ 여자가 남자보다 간지럼을 더 많이 타는 것으로 밝혀졌다.
⑤ 왼쪽 뇌가 긍정적 감정과 연관된다는 설명이 제시되었다.
38. Buffon에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Buffon was a famous zoologist and botanist during the
reign of the French monarch Louis ⅩⅥ. Buffon stocked the
park at Versailles with wild animals. He also expanded the
botanical garden on the Left Bank in Paris. And with the
confidence that goes with being a great collector, he began
writing a comprehensive natural history of the world. In
that work, Buffon expressed the biased opinion that native
animals of the New World are smaller than those of
Europe, that there are fewer species of animals in America,
and that even domesticated species of European animals
diminished in size and vigor upon crossing the Atlantic.
Obviously, his opinions were not well-received and were
severely criticized in America.
① Louis ⅩⅥ가 통치할 때의 동물학자이자 식물학자였다.
② Paris의 Left Bank에 있는 식물원을 확장했다.
③ 세계 자연사에 관한 글을 집필하기 시작했다.
④ America의 동물 종(種)이 Europe보다 많다는 견해를 표명했다.
⑤ 그의 견해들은 America에서 비판을 받았다.
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. After an event, all one has are memories of it. Because
most waits expect a desired outcome, it is the memory of the
outcome that dominates, not the intermediate components. If
the overall outcome is pleasurable enough, any unpleasantness
suffered along the way is minimized. Terence Mitchell and
Leigh Thompson call this ‘rosy retrospection.’ Mitchell and
his colleagues studied participants in a 12-day tour of Europe,
students going home for Thanksgiving vacation and a
three-week bicycle tour across California. In all of these cases,
the results were similar. Before an event, people looked
forward with positive anticipation. Afterward, they remembered
fondly. During? Well, reality seldom lives up to expectations,
so plenty of things go wrong. As memory takes over, however,
the unpleasantness fades and the good parts remain, perhaps
to intensify, and even get amplified beyond reality.
① 여행과 축제는 인생을 풍요롭게 하는 촉매제이다.
② 현실을 도외시한 예측은 부정적인 결과를 초래한다.
③ 바람직한 결과를 기대하면 현실의 어려움은 최소화된다.
④ 결과가 좋으면 나쁜 기억은 최소화되고 좋은 기억은 강화된다.
⑤ 기쁨을 얻기 위해 겪는 고통은 미래를 위한 투자가 될 수 있다.
40. Every day, it seems, we learn of an apology from a
prominent figure in response to an indiscretion of some sort.
Those in the public eye have an unfortunate tendency to
apologize only after they have been found with a hand in the
cookie jar. When this happens, it is only natural for a
skeptical public to wonder, “Are they apologizing for their
conduct, or simply because they were caught?” To make
matters worse, the wrongdoer will often use the passive voice
in his or her apology: “Mistakes were made,” rather than, “I
made a mistake.” It is more comfortable to use the passive
voice here, but doing so relinquishes any sense of personal
responsibility. It is a non-apology and is not very meaningful.
* relinquish: 저버리다
① 대중은 사회 문제에 민감하게 반응한다.
② 저명인사들은 자선 활동에 앞장서야 한다.
③ 대중은 지도자의 과실을 감시할 필요가 있다.
④ 저명인사는 실수를 저지르지 않도록 노력해야 한다.
⑤ 저명인사들의 책임 회피성 사과는 진정한 사과가 아니다.
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. We can infer that there was prosperity in ancient Athens
because this was a time that saw the planting of many olive
trees. Since olive trees do not produce their fruits for about
thirty years, their planting indicates that people were
optimistic about the future. The growth in the export of olive
oil also encouraged the development of pottery, in which the
oil was transported. About 535 B.C. came the invention of
red-figure vase painting. Now the whole surface of the vase
was blackened, with figures picked out in the natural red.
This allowed much more variety and realism. And the
prosperity brought about by the international trade in olive
oil spread to the peasants and it was their rituals, with choral
song and mimic dancing, that formed the basis of early
theater.
① Ancient Greece and Its Rich History
② What Olive Planting Brought to Athens
③ Olive Oil and Its Many Wondrous Uses
④ The Olive Tree: Key to Early Greek Theater
⑤ Ancient Athens: Center of International Trade
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7 8
42. Until recently, it was generally assumed that the first
humans took a northerly route to leave the African continent,
walking into the Middle East and then spreading out from
there. However, mtDNA analysis now suggests the exodus
may have proceeded via a more southerly route. In 2005, an
international team of researchers announced that an isolated
group living in Malaysia appeared to be the descendants of
humans who left Africa around 65,000 years ago. According
to the researchers, climatic change underway at the time
would have made a southerly route easier. The genetic
evidence suggests perhaps as few as several hundred
individuals went first to India, then Southeast Asia and
Australasia. If correct, this would explain why humans
appear to have reached Australia around 50,000 years ago,
while the oldest human remains in Europe ― a jawbone
found in Romania ― are only around 35,000 years old.
* mtDNA: 미토콘드리아 DNA
① Out of Africa: Which Way?
② Are Asians the First Humans?
③ How Reliable is mtDNA Analysis?
④ Climatic Change in Ancient Africa
⑤ Genetic Evolution of Human Beings
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Even worse than reaching a conclusion with just a
little evidence is the fallacy of reaching a conclusion
without any evidence at all. Sometimes people mistake
a separate event for a cause-and-effect relationship.
(A) You therefore leap to the conclusion that the man in
the black jacket has robbed the bank. However, such a
leap tends to land far from the truth of the matter. You
have absolutely no evidence ― only a suspicion based
on coincidence. This is a post hoc fallacy.
(B) They see that ‘A’ happened before ‘B’, so they
mistakenly assume that ‘A’ caused ‘B’. This is an error
known in logic as a post hoc fallacy.
(C) For example, suppose you see a man in a black jacket
hurry into a bank. You notice that he is nervously
carrying his briefcase, and a few moments later you
hear a siren.
① (A) - (B) - (C) ② (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (A) - (C) ④ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
The clanhouse usually consists of a room adjoining
the dwelling of the senior female member of the clan.
Hopi religion features a ritual calendar that includes a
large number of annually required ceremonies. In most cases,
each ceremony is ‘owned’ by the members of a certain clan.
( ① ) Every clan represented in a village has a clanhouse
in which the masks and other sacred items used in the
ceremonies are kept when not in use. ( ② ) This woman is
in charge of storing ritual equipment and of seeing to it
that they are treated with the proper respect. ( ③ ) There
is also a male head of each clan whose duties likewise are
partly religious because he is in charge of the performance
of ceremonies owned by his clan. ( ④ ) A male clan
head passes his position down to either his younger brother
or his sister’s son. ( ⑤ ) In this way, culturally important
ritual knowledge is kept within the clan.
* clan: 씨족
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The information processing model emphasizes rational
analysis for solving problems, with an emphasis on
techniques for quickly arriving at a solution. Culturally, this
orientation fits well with the kinds of mental attributes which
are normally valued by contemporary Western societies. For
example, Westerners tend to admire someone who is
independent and quick-thinking. But these characteristics are
not universally valued. Agricultural African societies, for
example, valued looking at the problem in the context of the
whole society, noting its impact on various features of life.
In most situations, speed in arriving at a solution was not a
vital issue. This is also found with the Cree and Ojibway in
Canada. These groups historically lived in wilderness areas
and faced many hardships; in these circumstances, they
would rarely get a second chance at solving problems.
Consequently, these Native people value taking time to
reflect on a problem and mentally walk through possible
solutions before any action is taken.
󰀻
In modern Western societies, (A) is highly
valued in problem-solving, whereas it is viewed
differently in some non-Western societies due to their
(B) .
 (A) (B)
① speed …… religious beliefs
② speed …… technical advances
③ speed …… cultural backgrounds
④ deliberation …… mental attributes
⑤ deliberation …… living conditions
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8 8
[46～47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The other day an acquaintance of mine, a sociable and
charming man, told me he had found himself unexpectedly
‘alone’ in New York for an hour or two between appointments.
He went to the Whitney Museum and spent the ‘empty’
time looking at things by himself. For him it proved to be
a shock nearly as great as falling in love to discover that
he could enjoy himself so much alone.
What had he been afraid of? I asked myself. That,
suddenly alone, he would discover that he bored himself,
or that there was, quite simply, no self there to meet? But
having taken the first step into this new world, he is now
about to begin a new adventure; he is about to be launched
into his own inner space, space as immense, unexplored,
and sometimes frightening as outer space to the astronaut.
His every perception will come to him with a new freshness
and, for a time, seem startlingly __________. For anyone
who can see things for himself with a naked eye becomes,
for a moment or two, something of a genius. With another
human being present vision becomes double vision, inevitably.
We are busy wondering, what does my companion see or
think of this, and what do I think of it? The original impact
gets lost.
“Music I heard with you was more than music.” Exactly.
And therefore music ‘itself’ can only be heard alone. Solitude
is the salt of personhood. It brings out the authentic flavor
of every experience.
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Finding Oneself through Solitude
② Coping with Loneliness in a City
③ The Path to Gaining Double Vision
④ An Unexpected Journey into Museums
⑤ Leisure vs. Work: Maintaining the Balance
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① problematic ② confusing ③ original
④ universal ⑤ similar
[48～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
My grandmother’s kitchen was overflowing with food.
She raised her daughters to keep an extra box and bottle
unopened in the cupboard for every bottle and box that was
in use. Although she died before I was born, I was raised
by her eldest daughter to do this same thing. Absentminded
as I am, I often find I have accumulated two or even three
extras of anything in my house.
(B)
Befriending life is not always about having things your
own way. Life is impermanent and full of broken eggs. But
what is true of eggs is even more true of pain and loss and
suffering. Certain things are too important to be wasted.
When I was sixteen, just after the doctor came and informed
me that I had a disease that no one knew how to cure, my
mother had reminded me of this.
(C)
But this abundance did not mean that things were to be
wasted. Everything was always used to the full. Even the
tea bags were used twice. There is a family story told about
my grandmother’s refrigerator. Her refrigerator was always
full to the very edges and every shelf was put to use.
Occasionally when someone, usually a child, opened it
without sufficient caution, an egg would fall out and break
on the kitchen floor. My grandmother’s response was always
the same. She would look at the broken egg with satisfaction.
“Aha,” she would say, “today we have a sponge cake!”
(D)
I had turned toward her in shock, but she did not cuddle
or soothe. Instead she reached out and took me by the hand.
“We will make a sponge cake,” she told me firmly. It has taken
many years to find the recipe, the one that is my own, but
I knew in that moment that this was what I needed to do.
* cuddle: 꼭 껴안다
48. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D) ③ (C) - (D) - (B)
④ (D) - (B) - (C) ⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
49. 주어진 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 나는 할머니가 돌아가신 후에 태어났다.
② 의사는 내가 불치병에 걸렸다고 알려 주었다.
③ 할머니의 냉장고는 항상 가득 차 있었다.
④ 할머니는 깨진 계란을 불만스럽게 바라보곤 하셨다.
⑤ 어머니가 손을 내밀어 나의 손을 잡아 주셨다.
50. 주어진 글의 밑줄 친 “We will make a sponge cake”의
문맥상 의미로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 매사에 신중하고 침착하게 행동하자.
② 건강한 신체는 행복한 삶의 원천이다.
③ 화목한 가정 생활은 무엇보다 소중하다.
④ 어려움을 긍정적으로 수용하고 극복하자.
⑤ 성격이 원만해야 타인과의 충돌을 피할 수 있다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 자전거를 고르시오.
①②③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① scared ② delighted ③ encouraged
④ annoyed ⑤ sympathetic
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 연령에 따른 성격의 변화
② 나쁜 잠버릇을 고치는 방법
③ 타고난 기질이 안 바뀌는 이유
④ 수면 자세와 성격 간의 관련성
⑤ 혈액형과 성격 간의 연관 가능성
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 세차 도와주기 ② 버스 기사에게 전화하기
③ 휴대전화 수리 맡기기 ④ 터미널 휴게실 청소하기
⑤ 차량 운행 시간 알려 주기
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문한 물건 값으로 한 달에 지불할 금액을
고르시오. [3점]
① $ 60 ② $ 120 ③ $ 250 ④ $ 360 ⑤ $ 400
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 음식물 보관 방법을 설명하려고
② 기금 마련 바자회를 홍보하려고
③ 학생들의 기부 참여를 독려하려고
④ 피자 파티의 일정 변경을 알리려고
⑤ 양로원 자원 봉사 활동을 안내하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to repair his broken computer
② to install an ad blocking program
③ to place a pop-up ad on a website
④ to help him block spam text messages
⑤ to let him know the name of a program
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
① 농구 경기장 ② 권투 시합장 ③ 빙상 경기장
④ 실내 수영장 ⑤ 육상 경기장
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 은행 직원 ― 고객
② 의사 ― 간호사
③ 경찰관 ― 보행자
④ 아파트 경비원 ― 방문객
⑤ 매표소 직원 ― 관람객
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 꽃 사러 가기 ② 놀이공원 가기
③ 졸업식 참석하기 ④ 쇼핑몰 구경하기
⑤ 전자사전 구입하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 방문할 박물관을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
12. The Walk of Harmony에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 4월 10일 토요일에 개최될 예정이다.
② 다문화 가정에 대한 인식을 높이기 위한 행사이다.
③ 비가 올 경우에는 행사가 취소된다.
④ 8세 미만의 아동은 어른이 꼭 동반해야 한다.
⑤ 참가 신청서는 웹 사이트에서 내려 받을 수 있다.
제 3 교시 홀수형
2 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
2 8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① I’m here to buy a suit for my concert.
② I’ll tell you who’s available by tomorrow.
③ I hope you’re feeling better from the flu.
④ I think we should put on the show right now.
⑤ I want to thank you for finding a replacement.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I’m not interested in those club activities.
② This rock concert is sure to be a big success.
③ My dream is to be the world chess champion.
④ That’s a great way to play musical instruments.
⑤ If you make them, I’ll help you post them up.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Don’t fix what isn’t broken.
② I’d move mountains for you.
③ It’s better to be safe than sorry.
④ You can’t please the whole world.
⑤ Time flies when you’re having fun.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Amy가 택시 기사에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Amy:
① Could you let me off here?
② Does this taxi go to N Seoul Tower?
③ Is there a shortcut to Gyeongbokgung?
④ How long does it take to get to the market?
⑤ Can you recommend a place to visit in Seoul?
 이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
My wife and I have enjoyed receiving your publication
for years. Unfortunately, our jobs now have us both traveling
most weeks, and we simply cannot keep up with a daily
paper. So we would like to request that you stop delivery
to our home. If you have questions about this matter, please
leave a message at (212) 555-5612, and either my wife or
I will call you back as soon as we can. Thank you for
years of reliable delivery of a first-rate newspaper. If our
situation changes, we will call you to resume delivery. In
the meantime, we will expect delivery to stop no later than
the end of this week.
① 여행 동행 제안을 거절하려고
② 신문 배달 중단을 요청하려고
③ 출판 일정에 대해 문의하려고
④ 변경된 전화번호를 안내하려고
⑤ 신속한 정정 보도에 감사하려고
19. 밑줄 친 she [her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Kate and Joan, who had not seen each other for three
months, were chatting happily in Joan’s apartment. After
a short conversation, Joan went to prepare coffee. Soon
① she came back with the cups and saucers and put them
down on a small side table. While Joan was looking for
a tablecloth, Kate was wandering around the room looking
at the pictures on the walls. Intent on one of the pictures,
② she took a step back and hit the small table, tipping it
over. All the cups and saucers were broken. Kate felt
guilty for ③ her negligence. As she helped Joan clean up,
④ she tried to think of a way to compensate her for the
damage. Later, Joan mentioned that she was looking for
volunteers to work in a fair she was organizing. Although
Kate had something important to do on that particular
Sunday, she decided to cancel ⑤ her plans and volunteer
to help Joan.
20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
The word ‘courage’ takes on added meaning if you keep in
mind that it is derived from the Latin word ‘cor’ ① meaning
‘heart.’ The dictionary defines courage as a ‘quality which
enables one to pursue a right course of action, through
② which one may provoke disapproval, hostility, or contempt.’
Over 300 years ago La Rochefoucauld went a step further
when he said: “Perfect courage is to do unwitnessed what
we should be capable of doing before all men.” It is not
easy ③ to show moral courage in the face of either
indifference or opposition. But persons who are daring in
taking a wholehearted stand for truth often ④ achieving
results that surpass their expectations. On the other hand,
halfhearted individuals are seldom distinguished for courage
even when it involves ⑤ their own welfare. To be courageous
under all circumstances requires strong determination.
* provoke: 유발하다
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 3
3 8
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
We anticipate the future as if we found it too slow in
coming and we were trying to hurry it up. (A) So / Such
imprudent are we that we wander about in times that
are not ours and do not think of the one that belongs
to us. We try to support the present with the future
and (B) think / thinking of arranging things we cannot
control, for a time we have no certainty of reaching.
Examine your thoughts, and you will find them wholly
(C) to occupy / occupied with the past or the future. We
almost never think of the present, and if we do so, it is
only to shed light on our plans for the future. The past
and the present are our means; only the future is our end.
(A) (B) (C)
① So …… thinking …… occupied
② So …… think …… to occupy
③ So …… think …… occupied
④ Such …… thinking …… occupied
⑤ Such …… thinking …… to occupy
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Consider the following implication involving the role of
social bonds and affection among group members. If strong
bonds make even a single dissent less likely, the performance
of groups and institutions will be impaired. ① A study of
investment clubs showed that the worst-performing clubs
were built on affective ties and were primarily social, while
the best-performing clubs limited social connections and
focused on making money. ② Dissent was far more frequent
in the high-performing clubs. ③ The low performers usually
voted unanimously, with little open debate. ④ As illustrated
in the study, the high performers placed more importance on
social bonds than the low performers, resulting in their high
rate of success. ⑤ The central problem is that the voters in
low-performing groups were trying to build social cohesion
rather than to produce the highest returns.
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
I have always taught my children that politeness, learning,
and order are good things, and that something good is to be
desired and developed for its own sake. But at school they
learned, and very quickly, that children earn Nature Trail
tickets for running the quarter-mile track during lunch
recess. Or Lincoln Dollars for picking up trash on the
playground or for helping a young child find the bathroom
― deeds that used to be called ‘good citizenship.’ Why is
it necessary to buy the minimal cooperation of children with
rewards and treats? What disturbs me is the idea that good
behavior must be reinforced with incentives. Children must
be taught to perform good deeds for their own sake, not in
order to receive stickers, stars, and candy bars.
① 남을 배려하는 마음을 갖도록 아이들을 가르쳐야 한다.
② 아이들이 서로 협력할 수 있도록 분위기를 조성해야 한다.
③ 잘못된 행동을 할지라도 아이들을 무조건 혼내지 말아야 한다.
④ 아이들이 보상 없이도 바람직한 행동을 하도록 가르쳐야 한다.
⑤ 아이들이 바른 시민으로 성장할 수 있도록 모범을 보여야 한다.
[24～29] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. In a classic set of studies over a ten-year period, biologist
Gerald Wilkinson found that, when vampire bats return to
their communal nests from a successful night’s foraging, they
frequently vomit blood and share it with other nest-mates,
including even non-relatives. The reason, it turns out, is that
blood-sharing greatly improves each bat’s chances of survival.
A bat that fails to feed for two nights is likely to die.
Wilkinson showed that the blood donors are typically sharing
their surpluses and, in so doing, are saving unsuccessful
foragers that are close to starvation. So the costs are
relatively low and the benefits are relatively high. Since no
bat can be certain of success on any given night, it is likely
that the donor will itself eventually need help from some
nest-mate. In effect, the vampire bats have created a kind
of . * forage: 먹이를 찾아다니다
① complex social hierarchy ② ecological diversity
③ mutual insurance system ④ parasitic relationship
⑤ effective reproduction process
25. One of the little understood paradoxes in communication
is that the more difficult the word, the shorter the
explanation. The more meaning you can pack into a single
word, the fewer words are needed to get the idea across. Big
words are resented by persons who don’t understand them
and, of course, very often they are used to confuse and
impress rather than clarify. But this is not the fault of
language; it is the arrogance of the individual who misuses
the tools of communication. The best reason for acquiring a
large vocabulary is that . A genuinely
educated person can express himself tersely and trimly. For
example, if you don’t know, or use, the word ‘imbricate,’
you have to say to someone, ‘having the edges overlapping
in a regular arrangement like tiles on a roof, scales on a
fish, or sepals on a plant.’ More than 20 words to say what
can be said in one.
① it keeps you from being long-winded
② you can avoid critical misunderstandings
③ it enables you to hide your true intentions
④ it makes you express yourself more impressively
⑤ you can use an easy word instead of a difficult one
26. So far as you are wholly concentrated on bringing about
a certain result, clearly the quicker and easier it is brought
about the better. Your resolve to secure a sufficiency of
food for yourself and your family will induce you to spend
weary days in tilling the ground and tending livestock; but
if Nature provided food and meat in abundance ready for
the table, you would thank Nature for sparing you much
labor and consider yourself so much the better off. An
executed purpose, in short, is a transaction in which the time
and energy spent on the execution are balanced against the
resulting assets, and the ideal case is one in which
. Purpose, then, justifies the
efforts it exacts only conditionally, by their fruits. [3점]
① demand exceeds supply, resulting in greater returns
② life becomes fruitful with our endless pursuit of dreams
③ the time and energy are limitless and assets are abundant
④ Nature does not reward those who do not exert efforts
⑤ the former approximates to zero and the latter to infinity
4 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
4 8
27. Psychologist Solomon Asch wanted to discover whether
people’s tendency to agree with their peers was stronger
than their tendency toward independent thought and rational
judgment. Asch assembled groups of twelve university
students and announced that they were taking part in an
experiment on visual perception. He showed them three line
segments, and asked each one in turn which line was the
longest. It was an easy task and the correct answer was
obvious. However, Asch had secretly instructed all but the
last person in each group, who was the real subject of the
experiment, to say that the medium-length line was the
longest. As it turned out, over 70 percent of the real subjects
 and said that the medium-length
line was the longest.
① caved in to group pressure
② figured out the correct answer
③ had problems with their vision
④ roped the other group members in
⑤ used rational judgment in their decision-making
28. Journeys are the midwives of thought. Few places are
more conducive to internal conversations than a moving plane,
ship, or train. There is an almost peculiar correlation between
what is in front of our eyes and the thoughts we are able to
have in our heads: large thoughts at times requiring large
views, new thoughts new places. Introspective reflections
which are liable to stall are helped along by the flow of the
landscape. The mind when thinking
is all it is supposed to do. The task can be as paralyzing as
having to tell a joke or mimic an accent on demand. Thinking
improves when parts of the mind are given other tasks, are
charged with listening to music or following a line of trees.
① may be reluctant to think properly
② may focus better on future thoughts
③ can become confused by multitasking
④ is likely to be paralyzed by fear of new tasks
⑤ can be distracted from what is before the eyes
29. It is a fundamental mistake to imagine that when we see
the non-value in a value or the untruth in a truth, the value
or the truth ceases to exist. It has only become relative.
Everything human is relative, because everything rests on
an inner polarity; for everything is a phenomenon of energy.
Energy necessarily depends on a pre-existing polarity, without
which there could be no energy. There must always be high
and low, hot and cold, etc., so that the equilibrating
process ― which is energy ― can take place. Therefore the
tendency to deny all previous values in favor of their
opposites is just . And in so
far as it is a question of rejecting universally accepted and
indubitable values, the result is a fatal loss. [3점]
① another way of pursuing relativeness in human affairs
② as desirable as the tendency to accept all those values
③ as much of an exaggeration as the earlier onesidedness
④ the one and only way of approaching the ultimate truth
⑤ to admit the presence of energy derived from an inner polarity
30. 다음 글에 드러난 Jess의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Jess took another step forward. The ground fell with
unexpected sharpness, and the water level seemed to jump
from her knees to her waist. She stopped for a moment and
anxiously scanned the river before her. Her legs started to
shake and she felt her body stiffen. And this was an
unknown river. There could be reeds, or other dangers she
didn’t know about. She was concerned that as a townie,
she’d had little experience of the countryside, and none at
all of swimming in rivers. It didn’t look safe enough but she
didn’t want to turn back. She took a deep breath and pushed
herself into the water. It felt nice and cool, not as freezing
as when she had first stepped into it. The water seemed to
welcome and embrace her. She liked the clean, luxuriant
feeling as she swept down with the current.
① bored → amused ② worried → pleased
③ joyous → terrified ④ excited → sorrowful
⑤ afraid → disappointed
31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Contrary to what we usually believe, the best moments in
our lives are not the passive, receptive, relaxing times ―
although such experiences can also be enjoyable, if we have
worked hard to (A) attain / avoid them. The best moments
usually occur when a person’s body or mind is stretched to
its limits in a voluntary effort to accomplish something
difficult and worthwhile. (B) Optimal / Minimal experience
is thus something that we make happen. For a child, it could
be placing with trembling fingers the last block on a tower she
has built, higher than any she has built so far; for a sprinter,
it could be trying to beat his own record; for a violinist,
mastering an (C) uncomplicated / intricate musical passage.
For each person there are thousands of opportunities, challenges
to expand ourselves.
(A) (B) (C)
① attain …… Minimal …… uncomplicated
② attain …… Optimal …… intricate
③ attain …… Optimal …… uncomplicated
④ avoid …… Optimal …… intricate
⑤ avoid …… Minimal …… uncomplicated
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Many people take numerous photos while traveling or on
vacation or during significant life celebrations to ① preserve
the experience for the future. But the role of photographer
may actually detract from their ② delight in the present
moment. I know a father who devoted himself earnestly to
photographing the birth of his first and only child. The
photos were beautiful but, he ③ lamented afterward he felt
that he had missed out on the most important first moment
of his son’s life. Looking through the camera lens made him
④ detached from the scene. He was just an observer, not an
experiencer. Teach yourself to use your camera in a way
that ⑤ neglects your ongoing experiences, by truly looking
at things and noticing what is beautiful and meaningful.
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 5
5 8
33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
No matter how good your product is, remember that
perfection of an existing product is not necessarily the best
investment one can make. (A) , the Erie Canal, which
took four years to build, was regarded as the height of
efficiency in its day. What its builders had not considered
was that the advent of the railroad would assure the canal’s
instant downfall. By the time the canal was finished, the
railroad had been established as the fittest technology for
transportation. (B) , when the fuel cell becomes the
automotive engine of choice, the car companies focusing on
increasing the efficiency of the internal combustion engine
may find themselves left behind. Is it time to keep making
what you are making? Or is it time to create a new niche?
Innovation requires noticing signals outside the company
itself: signals in the community, the environment, and the
world at large. * niche: 틈새
(A) (B)
① Furthermore …… Nevertheless
② Furthermore …… Otherwise
③ For example …… Likewise
④ For example …… However
⑤ In contrast …… Besides
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. Experienced writers invariably write in a climate of
discussion. Their writing is usually embedded in a context
of others’ ideas and opinions. Many writers, especially in
the academic community, are directly responding to other
writers ―a scientist reexamining the experimental procedures
of other scientists; a literary critic taking exception to a
prevailing method of interpretation; a sociologist offering
an alternative explanation of a colleague’s data; a historian
participating as respondent in a conference. Such people
are not writing in a vacuum. Their ideas often originate in
discussion, their writing is a response to discussion, and
their papers are designed to stimulate further discussion.
① the use of discussion in writing
② the need for self-criticism in writing
③ advantages of critical thinking on writing
④ research methods in scientific experiments
⑤ types of persuasive techniques in academic fields
35. Habitat diversity refers to the variety of places where
life exists. Each habitat is the home of numerous species,
most of which depend on that habitat. When it disappears,
a vast number of species disappear as well. More often, an
entire habitat does not completely disappear but instead is
reduced gradually until only small patches remain. This
has happened to old-growth forests and coastal wetlands in
the United States and is now occurring in tropical forests
throughout the world. Elimination of all but small patches of
habitat is especially damaging because it not only eliminates
many local species but also threatens those species that
depend on vast acreage for their survival.
① effects of habitat reduction on climate change
② the shrinkage of habitats and its consequences
③ the importance of forests and coastal wetlands
④ the relationship between types of habitats and species
⑤ ways to preserve natural habitats for endangered species
36. 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Around 350 B.C. there lived in Greece a very famous
painter named Apelles. It was his practice to conceal
himself at previews of his paintings in order to hear the
public’s opinions of his masterpieces. At one such preview
a bootmaker criticized the shoes in a painting on which
Apelles had labored long and hard. After correcting the
picture the painter arranged a second preview. This time
the bootmaker began to criticize the anatomy of one of the
characters. Apelles was unable to restrain himself, for he
knew that the criticism was unjust and the man knew
nothing about anatomy. From his hiding place Apelles
shouted, “Bootmaker, stick to your last!” From that time it
has been the custom to ridicule the people who act like
they know what they do not with the pointed caution,
“Stick to your last!”
① 기원전 350년경 그리스에 Apelles라는 무명의 화가가 살았다.
② Apelles는 시연회에서 대중의 의견을 듣지 않으려고 하였다.
③ 구두장이는 Apelles의 작품에 그려진 신발을 칭찬했다.
④ Apelles는 그림을 수정한 후 다시 시연회를 마련했다.
⑤ Apelles는 구두장이의 해부학적 지식이 풍부함을 인정했다.
37. bristlecone pines에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
Bristlecone pines are unusual trees that grow in the
mountain regions of western America, sometimes as high
as two or more miles above sea level. They grow very
slowly and range from 15 to 40 feet in height. These
evergreens often live for thousands of years. Considering
the habitat of these trees, such as rocky areas where the soil
is poor and precipitation is slight, it seems almost incredible
that they should live so long or even survive at all. The
environmental adversities, however, actually contribute to
their longevity. Cells that are produced as a result of these
conditions are densely arranged. The densely structured
wood is resistant to invasion by insects and other potential
pests. Bristlecone pines grow faster in richer conditions,
but die earlier and soon decay. The harshness of their
surroundings, then, is a vital factor in making them strong
and sturdy.
① 해발 2마일 이상 되는 곳에서 자라기도 한다.
② 높이는 15피트에서 40피트 사이이다.
③ 상록수로서 종종 수천 년 동안 산다.
④ 조직이 조밀하여 해충의 침입에 저항력이 있다.
⑤ 보다 나은 환경에서는 더 빨리 자라고 더 오래 산다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
6 8
38. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentage of children from
birth to 5 years of age by gender diagnosed with asthma
in rural and urban areas in Canada for the 2000-2001,
2002-2003, and 2004-2005 periods. ① For both rural and
urban areas, the percentages of male children diagnosed
with asthma were higher than those of female children for
all the periods. ② During all the periods, the percentages
of male children with asthma were higher in urban areas
than in rural areas. ③ Regarding female children with
asthma, the lowest percentage in urban areas was greater
than the highest percentage in rural areas. ④ In urban
areas, the percentage of male children with asthma in the
2004-2005 period was lower than that of male children
with asthma in the 2000-2001 period. ⑤ In rural areas,
the percentages of female children with asthma were the
same in the 2002-2003 period and the 2004-2005 period.
* asthma: 천식
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. Most people attack a new problem by relying heavily
on the tools and skills that are most familiar to them.
While this approach can work well for problems that are
similar to those previously solved, it often fails, and fails
miserably, when a new problem is particularly novel. In
this circumstance, it is best to assume nothing and treat
the problem as if you have never seen anything like it
before. In martial arts, this sense of looking freshly at
something is known as ‘beginner’s mind.’ Beginners to any
art don’t know what is important and what is irrelevant, so
they try to absorb every detail. Experienced martial artists
use their experience as a filter to separate the essential
from the irrelevant. When that filter mistakenly screens
out something essential, then even seasoned masters can
make mistakes.
① 고도의 기술을 연마할 때 진지한 태도를 지녀야 한다.
② 실수를 거울삼아 자신의 발전을 도모하는 것이 필요하다.
③ 이미 해결된 문제도 열린 마음으로 다시 볼 필요가 있다.
④ 직관보다는 경험에 의존하여 문제를 해결하는 것이 중요하다.
⑤ 새로운 문제는 초심자의 시각으로 접근하는 것이 바람직하다.
40. You see the world as one big contest, where everyone
is competing against everybody else. You feel that there is
a set amount of good and bad fortune out there. You believe
that there is no way that everyone can have everything.
When other people fail, you feel there’s a better chance
for you to succeed. However, there is not a limited supply
of resources out there. When one person wins, everyone
wins. Every victory one person makes is a breakthrough
for all. Whenever an Olympic swimmer sets a new world
record, it inspires others to bring out the best within them
and go beyond that achievement to set new records of
human performance. Whenever a geneticist unlocks new
secrets of the DNA molecule, it adds to our knowledge base
and enables us to better the human condition. Remember
that life is a game where there are multiple winners.
① 경쟁심은 기록 경신의 원동력이다.
② 인생은 예상치 못한 변수로 가득하다.
③ 성공하는 사람들은 성취동기가 분명하다.
④ 자원이 한정된 세상에서 경쟁은 불가피하다.
⑤ 한 사람의 성공은 다른 사람들에게도 이롭다.
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. University students in several of my seminar classes sat
in a circle and each student took turns telling the others
his or her name. At the end of the round of introductions,
the students were asked to write down the names of as
many other students as they could remember. In almost
every case, students wrote down the names of students
that were seated far away from them. However, surprisingly,
they weren’t able to recall the names of students who were
seated close to them. This effect was worst for the students
who sat on either side of them. What was the reason for
such findings? The student who was next in line for an
introduction was clearly on edge and after finishing his or
her introduction, he or she was preoccupied with calming
his or her nerves. The effect was clearly due to the social
anxiety they experienced immediately before and after having
to introduce themselves to the entire group.
① Ways to Cope with Nervousness
② Useful Strategies for Better Memory
③ How to Remember Uncommon Names
④ Nervousness and Its Effects on Memory
⑤ Seating Arrangements for Better Relations
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 7
7 8
42. Richard Dawkins and John Krebs argued that although
in some circumstances it might be appropriate to describe
animal signals as transferring information, in many other,
perhaps most, cases there would be such a conflict of
interest between signaller and receiver that it is more accurate
to describe the signaller as attempting to ‘manipulate’ the
receiver rather than just inform it. For example, an angler
fish that dangles a worm-like bit of skin in front of a small
fish and catches it because the smaller fish snaps at the
‘worm’ can certainly be said to have carried out a successful
manipulation of its prey. In this case, if information has
been transferred, it is most definitely false.
* dangle: 매달다
① Are Smaller Fishes Smarter?
② Talking Animals: Fact or Myth?
③ Cooperation in the Animal World
④ Manipulation: Tricking the Signaller
⑤ Animal Messages: Not What They Seem
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
The body has been viewed as a ‘natural’ phenomenon
― a fixed, unchanging fact of nature. Recently, however,
it is also being seen as a part of culture in the sense
that it can be socially defined in different ways.
(A) It has also opened up new questions and issues in the
sociology of sport. Some people in the sociology of
sport are now working with colleagues in other
disciplines who share interests in the body.
(B) Social definitions of the body are grounded in social
relations and influenced by those with the power to
promote agreement about what should be considered
‘natural’ when it comes to the body. This new way of
thinking about the body has challenged the traditional
mind-body split that has characterized Western thought
since the time of Plato.
(C) In their work they are asking critical questions about
how the body is trained, disciplined, and manipulated in
sports and how some sport scientists are using technology
to probe, monitor, test, evaluate, and rehabilitate the
body as a performance machine.
① (A) - (B) - (C) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
However, recent success in the packaged-cookie market
suggests that these may not be the only, or perhaps
even the most important, reasons.
Why eat a cookie? Some reasons might be to satisfy
your hunger, to increase your sugar level, or just to have
something to chew on. ( ① ) It appears that cookie-producing
companies are becoming aware of some other influences
and, as a result, are delivering to the market products
resulting from their awareness. ( ② ) These relatively new
product offerings are usually referred to as ‘soft’ or ‘chewy’
cookies, to distinguish them from the more typical crunchy
varieties. ( ③ ) Why all the fuss over their introduction?
( ④ ) Apparently much of their appeal has to do with
childhood memories of sitting on the back steps devouring
those melt-in-your-mouth cookies that were delivered by
Mom straight from the oven, while they were still soft.
( ⑤ ) This emotional and sensory appeal of soft cookies is
apparently at least as strong as are the physical cravings
that the product satisfies.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Unlike the modern society, the primitive society has
less specialized knowledge to transmit, and since its way
of life is enacted before the eyes of all, it has no need
to create a separate institution of education such as the
school. Instead, the child acquires the heritage of his
culture by observing and imitating adults in such activities
as rituals, hunts, festivals, cultivation, and harvesting.
As a result, there is little or none of that alienation of
young from old so marked in modern industrial societies.
A further reason for this alienation in modern societies
is that in his conception of reality the modern adult owes
less to his direct experience and more to the experience
of his culture than does primitive man. Clearly, his debt
to culture will vary with the nature of his education.
Hence, the contemporary child must travel much further
than the offspring of primitive man to acquire the world
view of his elders. He is, therefore, that much more
removed from the adults of his society.
󰀻
Unlike the primitive child who learns from his (A)
surroundings, the modern child learns in educational
institutions, which results in (B) from his elders.
(A) (B)
① foreign …… interference
② immediate …… sympathy
③ foreign …… sympathy
④ imaginary …… alienation
⑤ immediate …… alienation
8 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
8 8
[46～47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Many people believe that it is critical to share similar, if
not identical, beliefs and values with someone with whom
they have a relationship. While this may seem preferable, it
is far from mandatory. Individuals from extremely diverse
backgrounds have learned to overlook their differences and
live harmonious, loving lives together. I’ve seen people
from opposite ends of the spectrum economically and
politically that ended up in happy, lasting marriages. I’ve
seen couples from different ethnic groups merge into
harmonious relationships, and I’ve seen people from
different religions come together for a strong, lasting bond.
Furthermore, many good friends have little in common
except a warm loving feeling of respect and rapport.
That’s the only essential thing.
People who enjoy the best relationships with others, who
live life with the least frustration regarding their differences,
have learned that differences are to be expected, a fact of
life. This understanding must go beyond a mere intellectual
‘I know we’re all different.’ You must truly own this idea
and incorporate it into your daily life.
The way I see it, we have only two realistic choices.
We can the principle of separate realities and
remain frustrated and angry over the fact that no one
seems to conform to our way of thinking, or we can
strive to understand what in Eastern philosophy is called
‘the way of things.’ Separate realities is the way things
really are. Everyone is unique and has different gifts to
offer. When we look for these gifts we will surely find
them ― and in doing so, we will open the door to a world
of personal growth. * rapport: 친밀한(공감적인) 관계
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Facing Challenges in Life
② Leading an Intellectual Life
③ Finding Meaning in Friendship
④ Accepting Differences in Others
⑤ Enriching Life through Meditation
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① resist ② establish ③ master
④ grasp ⑤ overestimate
[48～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
After several futile attempts to teach the role of theme,
or the prominent repeated melody, in classical music, the
teacher was at wit’s end. Having reminded her students
many times that composers like Wagner depended on the
listeners’ remembering the earlier theme to recognize its
later use, (a) she was determined to make her students
understand that themes recur throughout a piece.
(B)
She knew that her class had little trouble with simple
variations and could easily identify themes that were
repeated in a similar way. But when the theme showed
much variation, the students’ attention focused on the new
detail to such an extent that they no longer ‘heard’ the
basic theme. For a week or two, the teacher worried about
the problem. Other teachers advised (b) her to go on with
something else, but she continued to search for a solution.
(C)
The following day in class, (c) she asked how many
students had tape recorders. A dozen or so students said,
“I do.” The teacher said excitedly, “I have an idea. Let’s
play Beethoven’s Eroica again. One of you can record the
theme when it’s first introduced. Then later, someone else
can record it the second time it appears. Finally, we’ll
have another person record when it appears next. Then we
can start all three tape recorders at exactly the same time
to see if the recordings fit!” Her students looked at (d) her
in surprise. Suddenly, however, delight appeared on their
faces. And so it was done. When they played the recordings
simultaneously, the sounds blended sufficiently for the
students to recognize their commonality.
(D)
With this problem in mind, one afternoon during the
lunch hour, she noticed a group of students gathered in a
corner of the school yard. Several girls were moving their
bodies rhythmically. Curious, she drew closer and found
that the students were listening to a new rock hit. A girl
in the center of the group held a tape recorder in (e) her
hand. At that moment, a sudden inspiration took hold.
48. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (C) - (D) ② (B) - (D) - (C)
③ (C) - (B) - (D) ④ (C) - (D) - (B)
⑤ (D) - (B) - (C)
49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
50. 주어진 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 교사는 고전 음악에서 주제가 반복됨을 학생들에게 이해시키려 했다.
② 학생들은 단순한 변주 부분을 이해하는 데 별 문제가 없었다.
③ 교사는 학생들에게 녹음기를 가지고 있는지를 물었다.
④ 학생들은 자신들이 녹음한 세 부분을 차례로 재생해 들었다.
⑤ 몇몇 학생들이 점심시간에 운동장에서 록 음악을 듣고 있었다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.