1 8
◦ 문제지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 쓰시오.
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 쓰고, 또 수험 번호와
답을 정확히 표시하시오.
◦ 문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을
참고하시오. 1점과 3점 문항에만 점수가 표시되어 있습니다.
점수 표시가 없는 문항은 모두 2점입니다.
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 찍을 사진의 대상을 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정 변화로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① upset → relieved ② curious → disappointed
③ delighted → worried ④ indifferent → thankful
⑤ excited → stressed
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르
시오. 실험실 수업의 장단점 ①
② 교내 안전사고 방지 방안
③ 실험실 화재 발생 시 대피 요령
④ 실험실 수업 시 올바른 용의복장
⑤ 학생 용의복장 규정 개정의 필요성
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to repair the printer
② to print out a coupon
③ to sign up for the website
④ to make a call to the office
⑤ to visit the Customer Service
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $160 ② $ 170 ③ $180 ④ $190 ⑤ $200
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고
르시오.
① 놀이동산 개장 시간 변경을 안내하려고
② 놀이동산 안내 책자를 소개하려고
③ 놀이기구 이용 수칙을 설명하려고
④ 놀이기구 운행 중지를 알리려고
⑤ 새로운 놀이기구를 홍보하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 명찰 만들기 ② 명찰 나누어 주기
③ 프로젝트 도와주기 ④ 워크숍에 데려다 주기
⑤ 워크숍에 대신 참석하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳
을 고르시오.
① 민속촌 ② 버스 안 ③ 지하철역
④ 결혼식장 ⑤ 엘리베이터 앞
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 가게 주인-점원 ② 부동산 중개인-집주인
③ 출판업자-소설가 ④ 경비원-아파트 입주민
⑤ 집배원-우편물 수령인
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 점원 추천하기 ② 일자리 소개하기
③ 할인 판매 홍보하기 ④ 재고 목록 작성하기
⑤ 상품 포장하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 예약할 방갈로를 고르
시오.
Bungalows at Meadow Campsite
Person Bedroom Price Feature
① up to 5 2 $65 Fireplace
② up to 5 2 $70 Lake view
③ up to 8 2 $70 Additional bathroom
④ up to 8 3 $100 Lake view
⑤ up to 8 3 $100 Additional bathroom
12. 다음을 듣고, Felucca Tour에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것
을 고르시오. [3점]
① 오전 9시에 시작한다.
② 전체 소요 시간은 3시간이다.
③ 도중에 섬에 내려 관광을 한다.
④ 섬에서 점심 식사를 한다.
⑤ 인원에 따라 일인당 요금이 다르다.
2012학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
제 3 교시 외국어(영어) 영역
성명 수험 번호 3 1
외국어(영어) 영역 2
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
2 8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① I believe you’ll look great at the audition.
② That’s a good idea. I’ll buy new contact lenses.
③ I’m afraid your eye infection won’t go away easily.
④ Okay. I’m going to wear my glasses from now on.
⑤ I don’t want to. I can’t see well without my glasses.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Calm down. We don’t have to hurry.
② They’re fine. You don’t need to return them.
③ It’s a formal party. You should dress up in a suit.
④ That’s because everyone loves to wear jeans.
⑤ I don’t want to buy jeans and a sweater.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① You got me wrong. I love to get free stuff.
② I’ll give it to you. It’s still in good condition.
③ No, I don’t. I prefer to buy brand-new products.
④ You’re right. I don’t usually throw away my stuff.
⑤ Exactly. You shouldn’t throw things away on the street.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Alice가 경비원에게 할 말로 가장 적
절한 것을 고르시오.
Alice:
① Wow, time flies! Let’s go home now.
② The building is locked. Can you open it?
③ Sorry, but is it okay if I leave around eleven?
④ Thanks for letting me know. I’ll be there soon.
⑤ The presentation will be delayed for thirty minutes.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제는 다 끝났습니다. 18번부터는
문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
You can learn the success secrets of the greatest people
who ever lived. The lives of famous people have been
recorded in biographies and are ready for you to read and
research. The lives of great government leaders,
businesspeople, and humanitarians are there. You will read
about successes and triumphs. You will also learn how many
times champions lose on their way to winning. In reading
biographies, you may come to the startling conclusion that
you are not very different from those great people. You may
conclude, “Hey, I can do that.” You can make your life
significant. Biographies help show the way. You only have to
go to the library, bookstores, or surf the Internet.
① 위인전 읽기를 장려하려고
② 자기 계발 프로그램을 홍보하려고
③ 도서 구입 예산 증대를 요청하려고
④ 효율적인 자료 수집 방법을 소개하려고
⑤ 자서전 출판을 위한 정보를 제공하려고
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? [1점]
Nineteenth-century inventors often found themselves
cheated and spent much of their lives fighting costly
court battles. Consider the fate of poor Elias Howe. In
1846, ①this young Boston native produced the first
workable sewing machine. The trouble was that no one
wanted it. Depressed by his failure, Howe traveled to
England, where ② he hoped that the invention might be
given a warmer reception. It was not. After two terrible
years, ③ the frustrated inventor had to work his passage
home on a merchant ship. Arriving penniless in Boston, he
discovered that in his absence a man called Isaac Singer
had stolen ④his patent and set up a sewing machine
factory. Howe took Singer to court, where two things
became clear: Singer was a thief, but ⑤he was so rich that
he could afford to hire the sharpest lawyers. It was only
after a lengthy fight that Howe could get royalties from
Singer.
20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
We do not hear with our eyes, but sometimes it almost
seems as if we do. An environment-agency official tells a
surprising incident about some people ①who lived in an
apartment building close to a busy state highway. The
families were made ②miserably by the noise, and they
complained to the city government. City officials went to the
state capital again and again to ask that something ③be
done about quieting the highway noise. They were put off
repeatedly. At last the city officials had an idea. They
planted a single row of trees in front of the apartment
house. The trees made hardly any difference in the amount
of noise, but they ④did block the view of the highway.
After that, there were very ⑤few complaints from the
people in the building.
외국어(영어) 영역 3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
3 8
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
The observation that old windows are often thicker at the
bottom than at the top (A)is/ are often offered as supporting
evidence for the view that glass flows over a time scale of
centuries. However, this assumption is incorrect; once
solidified, glass does not flow anymore. The reason for the
observation is (B) that / what in the past, making uniformly
flat glass was almost impossible. The technique used to make
panes of glass was to spin molten glass so as to create a
round, mostly flat plate. This plate was then cut to fit a
window. However, the edges of the disk became thicker as
the glass spun. When (C)installing/ installed in a window
frame, the glass would be placed thicker side down for the
sake of stability. *molten: 녹은, 용해된
(A) (B) (C) (A) (B) (C)
① is that installing ② is what installed
③ is that installed ④ are what installing
⑤ are what installed
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Rice paddies are “built,” not “opened up” the way a wheat
field is. You don’t just clear the trees, underbrush, and
stones, and then plow. ①Rice paddies are carved into
mountainsides in an elaborate series of terraces, or
painstakingly constructed from marshland and river plains.
②The crops turn a magical green, and by the time of the
first harvest, the land becomes an unending sea of yellow.
③They have to be irrigated, so a complex system of
channels must be dug from the nearest water source. ④The
paddy itself, meanwhile, has to have a hard clay floor;
otherwise the water will simply seep into the ground. ⑤And
the paddy has to be carefully engineered so that it will drain
properly and also keep the plants submerged at the optimum
level. *rice paddy: 논
23. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
After five hours of rock climbing, we six finally stood on
top, shaking hands. It was a big moment. As I grasped the
hands of my companions, one by one, I felt I was being
welcomed into a special club: the brotherhood of the rope.
Having missed breakfast we turned eagerly to lunch, breaking
out peanut butter sandwiches, apples, and cookies. As we sat
on the summit, gobbling the food, we surveyed our domain
like kings—the lakes, the rolling granite, the meadows and
forests, all spread out beneath us. Beautiful spires rose on
all sides. This was the wonderland of the High Sierra and we
were in the heart of it. We weren’t just visitors or mere
sightseers. We had struggled and climbed a mountain. We had
earned the right to be part of all this. * spire: 뾰족한 봉우리
① pleased and proud ② eager and envious
③ scared and desperate ④ curious and grateful
⑤ surprised and confused
24. 자녀의 행동 교정에 관해 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
There are all kinds of reasons that people fail themselves
and their children when trying to correct inappropriate behavior.
One of them is both serious and obvious to people outside the
“parental unit.” It occurs when one parent interferes with the
other during the correction process. It is hardly ever done
consciously and it almost always happens because of predictable,
inherent differences between partners. And it is essential to
stop. Couples who do not present a united front to their
children not only risk confusing their children, but they also
risk damaging their husband-wife relationships. One parent
becomes the good guy, and the other becomes the bad guy to
the kids. If Dad says “no candy” at the grocery store and Mom
gives in all the time, look out. They’re in for trouble.
① 부부가 동일한 태도를 취해야 한다.
② 전문 기관에 조언을 구해야 한다.
③ 보상을 적절하게 활용해야 한다.
④ 장기적인 계획을 세워야 한다.
⑤ 엄격한 규칙을 정해야 한다.
[25~30] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
25. Psychologists have spent years trying to discover the answer
to the question, “What makes innovators different?” In one of
the most thorough examinations of the subject, Harvard
researchers spent six years and interviewed three thousand
executives to find out. Their conclusions are interesting, but the
investigators could have saved themselves a lot of time by
simply asking Steve Jobs. According to the Harvard research,
the number one skill that separates innovators from noncreative
professionals is “associating”: the ability to successfully connect
seemingly unrelated questions, problems, or ideas from different
fields. “The more diverse our experience and knowledge, the
more connections the brain can make. Fresh inputs trigger new
associations; for some, these lead to .”
① novel ideas ② scientific proofs
③ moral lessons ④ cultural diversity
⑤ mistaken conclusions
26. When you watch a chase scene in an action movie, your
heart races as well —you may be a little bit scared, or
excited. Your body and mind may react like the experience
is real, as though it is happening to you. That’s what
happens when you visualize: You ask for the experience and
your mind believes that it is real, which creates the
attraction for you to receive in your life. This technique is
favored by many of the world’s great coaches as they
encourage athletes to visualize the actual race or contest
ahead of time. Every stroke, step, and muscle exertion is
vividly imagined. The idea is, when you see it in your mind,
your body will surely follow. And, when the big day comes,
mind and body are so well trained to act in unison that
is virtually assured.
① fierce competition ② group cooperation
③ ultimate performance ④ public reputation
⑤ visual observation
외국어(영어) 영역 4
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
4 8
27. The other day, while riding in an airplane flying at 30,000
feet, I had a sudden realization. I knew nothing about the
pilot, beyond the sound of his voice. I couldn’t even
remember his name because I had not been paying close
attention when he made his welcoming announcement. Yet I
was there, feeling comfortable and safe. I realized that I
was lacking a lot of other important information about the
situation I was in. Who were the mechanics that checked the
plane before it took off? Who had put in the fuel? Who had
performed the routine maintenance? Who were the air traffic
controllers that were watching the little spot on their
tracking screens, the little spot that contained my life and
the lives of my fellow passengers? The awareness of
really came home to me.
① what impact air travel could have on us
② how many people overcame the fear of flying
③ how much trust we put in complete strangers
④ what great new ideas we got from traveling
⑤ how fast technology changed our lives
28. Our sense of smell is particularly vulnerable to outside
influence. A team of scientists at Oxford has shown that a
simple word label can profoundly alter what we think our
noses are telling us. When an experimental subject is given
odorless air to smell but told he is smelling cheddar cheese,
his olfactory areas light up in hungry anticipation. But when
the same air arrives with a “body-odor” label, the subject
unwittingly shuts down the smell areas of his brain.
Although the sensation hasn’t changed— it’s still just purified
air —the mind has completely revised its olfactory response.
We unknowingly deceive ourselves. In reality, our olfactory
sensations . * olfactory: 후각의
① control our overall mood
② bring about old memories
③ keep us from enjoying food
④ are influenced by their context
⑤ compensate for the loss of sight
29. During World War II, a physician named Henry Beecher
was stationed on Italy’s Anzio beachhead, where he treated
201 wounded soldiers. In recording his treatments, he
observed that only three-quarters of the wounded soldiers
requested pain medication, although they had suffered serious
injuries ranging from penetrating wounds to extensive surgical
wounds. Beecher compared these observations to treatments
of his civilian patients who had been hurt in all kinds of
accidents, and he found that people with civilian injuries
requested more medication than the soldiers injured in battle
did. Beecher concluded that there was no direct relationship
between the severity of the wound and the intensity of pain.
He was among the first to propose that greatly
determines the level of pain. For soldiers, the wound meant
surviving combat and returning home.
* beachhead: (군사) 해안 교두보
① the kind of drug used for treatment
② the previous experience of severe pain
③ the meaning our minds give to an injury
④ the way caregivers interact with patients
⑤ the quality of medical information given to patients
30. A few years ago, the animal researcher Maxine Morris
spotted some curious behavior while observing a group of
Asian elephants at Washington Park Zoo in Indiana. At
feeding time, each elephant was given a big bundle of hay.
Morris noticed that a couple of the elephants tended to eat
their own hay quickly, approach their slower-eating
companions, and then start swinging their trunks from side
to side in a seemingly aimless way. To the uninformed, it
appeared that these elephants were just passing the time of
day. However, Morris’s repeated observations suggested that
. Once the trunk-swinging elephants
were sufficiently close to another elephant, they would
suddenly grab some of the uneaten hay and quickly gobble it
up. Elephants are notoriously nearsighted, and so the
slow-eating elephants were often completely unaware of the
theft. [3점]
① this behavior often turned into a fierce fight for mates
② their friendly nature was hidden behind this behavior
③ the trunk-swinging ensured their dominant position
④ their trunks were used to warn outside danger
⑤ this behavior masked a dishonest intent
31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
There are situations in which the differences between
experts and the public reflect a genuine conflict of values.
(A) , experts often measure risks by the number of
lives lost, while the public tends to draw finer distinctions
between “good deaths” and “bad deaths,” or between random
accidental fatalities and deaths that occur in the course of
voluntary activities such as skiing. These legitimate
distinctions are often ignored in statistics that merely count
cases. The public may have a richer conception of risks than
the experts do. (B) , the view cannot be maintained
that experts’ opinions should be accepted without question
when they conflict with the opinions of other citizens. When
experts and the public disagree on their priorities, each side
must respect the insights and intelligence of the other.
(A) (B)
① For example ···· Consequently
② For example ···· In contrast
③ For example ···· In addition
④ However ···· In addition
⑤ However ···· Consequently
외국어(영어) 영역 5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
5 8
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Girls usually agreed that wearing a uniform to school
every day ①reduced their daily stresses. Not having to
worry about what to wear meant one less decision to
make every morning. Many of them also felt that the
uniform ② enhanced school spirit and solidarity. They could
feel like they belong to a community. Moreover, the
uniforms ③eliminated their individuality. If you want to
know a thousand and one ways to ④modify a school
uniform, just ask the girls who wear it: ties can be worn
loosely or tight, and skirts can be raised or lowered in any
of a half-dozen ways. Then there are accessories— a gray
region in the dress code, but an entire subcontinent in the
world of women’s apparel. There are a million ⑤options in
the domain of hairpins, watches, and bags alone.
33. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Even an electronic car key can (A) cause/ fight crime.
After a thief broke into a car, the owner, alerted to the
break-in by a neighbor, grabbed her car keys and hurried
outside. When the burglar saw the owner approaching, he
tried to exit the car. But the owner was too fast. She
pressed the automatic “lock” button on the car’s remote key
system, (B) releasing / trapping the burglar. When the bad
guy unlocked the door, the owner locked it again before he
could escape. Over and over the burglar tried to unlock the
door, and over and over the owner relocked it. The burglar
finally put up his hands in (C) surrender / resistance and
waited for the police to arrive.
(A) (B) (C)
① cause ···· releasing ···· resistance
② cause ···· releasing ···· surrender
③ fight ···· trapping ···· surrender
④ fight ···· releasing ···· surrender
⑤ fight ···· trapping ···· resistance
[34~35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. The chef always wears a uniform in the kitchen. The
uniform protects the chef from the food, and it also protects
the food from the chef. In the first case, the long sleeves,
long pants, and double-breasted jacket are a barrier against
burns, spills, and splatters. Sturdy shoes guard against
falling equipment and knives, and they also prevent the chef
from slipping on floors made slippery by spilled food and
grease. In the second case, the long sleeves, double-breasted
jacket, and neckerchief protect the food from a sweating chef.
The tall white chef’s hat keeps the chef’s hair out of his
eyes and out of the food, and also, like the stars on a
general’s hat or the distinctive hat of an admiral, makes it
easy to see who is in charge in a crowded kitchen.
① hidden dangers in the kitchen
② the functions of the chef’s uniform
③ the value of a well-organized kitchen
④ the process of inventing a new dish
⑤ the do’s and don’ts in the kitchen
35. Try an interesting experiment. Call a friend and say, “I’m
mad at you” in a tone that conveys that you aren’t ―the
tone you would use if the next sentence were something
like, “You didn’t tell me about your promotion.” Then ask
your friend if she thought you were truly angry. The answer
will probably be no. Now imagine what would have happened
if you had sent that friend an email that read, “I’m mad at
you.” Our voice is a very subtle instrument and can convey
every shade and nuance. An executive recruiter said she
never uses email to check references. When she’s on the
phone, a pause or a strained voice in response to a question
about work habits can hint at a more complicated answer
than the one she’s been given.
① why expressing negative feelings is important
② voice as a subtle instrument in communication
③ the relationship between voice and personality
④ how to be successful in a job interview
⑤ how to interpret others’ emotions
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
This graph shows how much waste was produced from
2006 to 2010 by our company. ① The total amount of
waste produced each year was over 10,000 tons between
2006 and 2008, but it fell to below 10,000 tons starting
from 2009. ② The rate of recycling waste increased during
the five-year period, reaching ninety-seven percent in
2010. ③Meanwhile, the amount of recycled waste reached
its peak in 2008. ④On the other hand, the waste that was
disposed of in landfills decreased in amount during the years
from 2006 to 2010. ⑤Especially in 2008, the landfill amount
sharply decreased to less than half that of the previous year.
외국어(영어) 영역 6
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
6 8
37. ‘The object’에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
In 1898, a peculiar six-inch wooden object was found in a
tomb in Egypt. ‘The object’ had a body, seven-inch wings
that curved downward slightly, a fixed rudder, and a tail. It
looked very much like a modern airplane. But as airplanes
had not yet been invented in 1898, it was labeled as a
model of a bird and just stored away in the basement of the
Cairo Museum. In 1969, the object was rediscovered by Dr.
Khalil Messiha, an authority on ancient models. According to
him and to other researchers, it has characteristics of very
advanced aerodynamics. The curved wings can attain great
amounts of lift, and a similar design is employed on the
Concorde aircraft. Was this just a child’s toy? Or was it a
scale model of an aircraft the Egyptians planned to build...
or built? Even if they did build a full-scale version of the
aircraft, no evidence exists of it.
* rudder: (비행기 등의)방향타
① 1898년에 Khalil Messiha 박사가 발굴하였다.
② 발굴 당시에는 비행기의 모형으로 생각되었다.
③ 카이로 박물관으로부터 보관을 거절당했다.
④ 날개의 모양이 콩코드 비행기와 비슷하다.
⑤ 아동용 장난감이었다는 증거가 있다.
38. Lake Vostok에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Miles underneath the ice in Antarctica lie liquid lakes. The
largest of these is Lake Vostok, which is similar in size to
Lake Ontario in Canada, but four times as deep. Lake Vostok
was formed along geologic fault lines. It stays liquid because
of the pressure of the glaciers above it and the heat from
the geologic fault beneath. Lake Vostok is thought to have
been sealed off from Earth’s atmosphere for half a million
years. Samples of ice from near the surface of Lake Vostok,
located under a glacier more than 3.2 km thick, contain
microbes thought to have come from inside the lake.
Scientists are working to create technology that will allow
them to remove water samples from the lake and examine
them for ancient life in a way that does not introduce
contamination from the modern world.
*fault: (지질) 단층
① 남극 대륙의 빙하 아래에 존재하는 호수이다.
② 단층선이 지나는 곳을 따라 형성되어 있다.
③ 지상의 공기로부터 50만년 동안 차단된 것으로 여겨진다.
④ 수면 근처의 얼음 샘플에서 미생물이 발견되지 않았다.
⑤ 오염을 유발하지 않는 물 샘플 채취 기술이 개발되고 있다.
[39~40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. As a counselor, I often use the North Star as a metaphor.
I tell clients: You are in a boat that is being tossed around
by the winds of the world. The voices of your parents, your
teachers, your friends, and the media can blow you east,
then west, then back again. To stay on course you must
follow your own North Star, your sense of who you truly
are. Only by orienting north can you keep from being blown
all over the sea. True freedom has more to do with
following the North Star than with going whichever way the
wind blows. Sometimes it seems like freedom is blowing
with the winds of the day, but that kind of freedom is really
an illusion. It turns your boat in circles. Freedom is sailing
toward your dreams.
① 다양한 의견을 듣고 진로를 정해야 한다.
② 꿈을 이룰 자유는 누구에게나 보장되어야 한다.
③ 적절한 순간에 도움을 주는 청소년 상담이 필요하다.
④ 학교와 가정은 청소년을 보호하는 역할에 충실해야 한다.
⑤ 외부의 영향에 휘둘리지 말고 뚜렷한 주관을 가져야 한다.
40. “It’s great, it’s amazing, it’s so cool....” Can you tell from
these whether it’s your coworker telling you about her new
car, or your teenager son describing the new telephone he
wants you to get him? I’m sure you can’t. We’ll believe your
experience is amazing only if you tell us why. We need to
know ―what did you see? Hear? Touch? Taste? Smell? How
did it make you feel? What did it remind you of? Notice
when others are just saying, “great,” “amazing,” “bad,”
“terrible.” Once you’ve spent some time observing others,
you will want to change your own bad habits of using these
meaningless words. Now, let’s practice: How was your day?
Your sandwiches? The movie? Instead of blurting out, “It
was great,” try to answer these questions as vividly as
possible. Once you learn to do that, people will start
referring to you as a master storyteller.
① 상대방의 관심사에 따라 화제를 전환하라.
② 자신의 기준만으로 다른 사람을 판단하지 말라.
③ 자신의 경험을 잘 전달하려면 구체적으로 묘사하라.
④ 긍정적인 반응을 통해 상대방이 말하도록 격려하라.
⑤ 신뢰감을 얻으려면 어려운 어휘의 사용을 자제하라.
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. In 2007, the Ecuadorean government announced that it
intended to protect the oilfields located in the Yasuni
Rainforest. It’s home to one of the world’s largest undeveloped
oil reserves—close to one billion barrels’ worth. Not extracting
that oil will prevent the release of an estimated 400 million
tons of carbon into the atmosphere. Taking a stand for the
Yasuni oilfield’s protection is a bold move, considering that
about seventy percent of Ecuador’s income is from oil. To
accomplish the plan, they asked the international community to pay
them half of the income that would result from the extraction, or
$350 million a year for a decade. This is a big deal: an
innovative idea that other developing countries could employ to
protect their own resources and help combat climate change.
외국어(영어) 영역 7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
7 8
① Keep the Oil Underground for the Earth
② Uncover the Hidden Costs of Cheap Oil
③ Secure International Aid for the Poor
④ Don’t Raise the Oil Prices
⑤ Find New Energy Sources
42. Some people work long hours even at very high levels of
income. Have they got their priorities right? Most people
would agree that, at a low level of income, an increase in
income is likely to improve your quality of life, even if it
means longer working hours. At this level, even if you have
to work longer in your factory, higher income is likely to
bring a higher overall quality of life by improving your
health through better food, heating, hygiene and healthcare
and by reducing the physical demands of household work
through more household appliances. However, above a certain
level of income, the relative value of material consumption
in relation to leisure time is diminished, so earning a higher
income at the cost of working longer hours may reduce the
quality of your life.
① Does Working More Always Pay?
② Happier People Work Harder
③ Equal Pay for Equal Work
Consume Less, Save More ④
⑤ How Does Income Affect Health?
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
My family moved to a two-story house. One day, my
husband and I discovered that when our kids were in a
certain section of the basement, the sounds of their
playing floated up through the heating vent into our room.
(A) I was shocked. It hadn’t occurred to me that they could
overhear us just as well as we could overhear them,
though this was obvious as soon as they mentioned it.
(B) As I was reading on the couch near that vent, I was
astonished by how clearly I could hear every word they
were saying. For a few minutes, I listened intently. But
then I felt sneaky.
(C) So when they scrambled up the stairs, demanding lunch,
I told them the secret. I thought they’d be surprised, but
they weren’t. They just shrugged their shoulders. “We
know,” they said. “We hear you and Daddy talking, too.”
① (A) ‑ (C)‑ (B) ② (B) ‑ (A) ‑ (C)
③ (B) ‑ (C) ‑ (A) ④ (C) ‑ (A) ‑ (B)
⑤ (C) ‑ (B) ‑ (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
When the runners arrived they grabbed the figures — the
first taking the most noble birds, the last getting the
worthless reptile.
To become a member of the Inca upper class it was
necessary to have a four-year education in which a running
race was the most important test. ( ① ) On the first day of
the running examination, the candidates gathered in the great
square in Cuzco. ( ② ) Together with their families the
whole group went to Mt. Huanacauri, in order to live on a
strict diet of water and raw corn and to perform rituals and
dances. ( ③ ) A few days later, the candidates competed in
a five-mile race to the holy hill of Huanacauri. ( ④ )
Before the day of the race the organizers placed animal
figures carved in stone-salt on the summit, which was the
finishing line; the figures depicted the falcon, the eagle, the
wild duck, the humming bird, the fox, the snake, and so on.
( ⑤ ) Thus each man carried the proof of his own strength
or weakness and the spectators knew who to praise and who
to mock.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
In one study, people were put one at a time in a
pressure chamber and told that the pressure would slowly
be increased to that of a sixty-foot dive. While inside
the pressure chamber, the subject was asked to perform
two simple visual tasks. One task was to respond to
blinking lights in the center of the subject’s visual field,
and the other involved responding to blinking lights in his
peripheral, or side vision. As expected, each of the
subjects inside the pressure chamber showed all the usual
signs of panic — racing pulse and elevated blood pressure.
These symptoms affected performance in a very distinct
way. Although the people in the pressure chamber
performed just as well as control subjects in an ordinary
room did on the central visual task, those in the pressure
room were twice as likely to miss the lights in their
peripheral vision.
This experiment showed that when the level of (A)
got high, the range of vision became (B) .
(A) (B)
① anxiety ···· wider
② anxiety ···· narrower
③ curiosity ···· wider
④ curiosity ···· narrower
⑤ proficiency ···· narrower
외국어(영어) 영역 8
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
8 8
[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
On the first day of shooting for The 39 Steps in 1935,
Hitchcock’s two leads, Madeleine Carroll and Robert Donat,
arrived on the set feeling a little tense. That day (a)they
were to act in one of the movie’s more complex scenes:
playing relative strangers who had gotten handcuffed
together earlier in the plot and, still handcuffed, were forced
to run through the Scottish countryside to escape the film’s
villains. Hitchcock had given them no real sign of how he
wanted (b)them to act the scene. Carroll in particular was
bothered by the director’s behavior.
(B)
This English actress, one of the most elegant film
stars of the period, had spent much of her career in
Hollywood, where directors had treated her like royalty;
Hitchcock, on the other hand, was distant, hard to figure
out. She had decided to play the scene with an air of
dignity, the way she thought a lady would respond to the
situation of being handcuffed to a strange man. When
Hitchcock arrived on the set, he explained the scene to
the two actors, snapped a pair of handcuffs on them, and
proceeded to lead (c) them through the set.
(C)
Hitchcock returned in the afternoon— he had found the
key. Shooting began, but as the actors went to work, it
was hard for (d) them to get over the experience of that
day. Carroll had forgotten all her ideas about how to play
the scene. And yet, despite her and Donat’s anger, the
scene seemed to flow with unexpected naturalness. Now
they knew what it was like to be tied together; they had
felt the awkwardness, so there was no need to act it. It
came from within.
(D)
Then, in the middle of this demonstration, he was
suddenly called away to attend to a technical matter. He
would return soon; they should take a break. He felt in
his pockets for the key to the handcuffs — but no, he
must have mislaid it, and off he hurried, seemingly to
find the key. Hours went by. Donat and Carroll became
increasingly frustrated and embarrassed. While the crew
members were free to go about (e) their business, the
two stars were tied together. They could not even go to
the bathroom. It was humiliating.
46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
① (B) ‑ (D) ‑ (C) ② (C) ‑ (B) ‑ (D) ③ (C) ‑ (D) ‑ (B)
④ (D) ‑ (B) ‑ (C) ⑤ (D) ‑ (C) ‑ (B)
47. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
48. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Movie: A Fountain of Inspiration
② Making a Movie Without a Director
③ Bitter Rivalry Between Movie Stars
④ Natural Acting Through Real Experience
⑤ Self-Confidence: An Essential Quality for Actors
[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
A few years ago I met a man named Phil at a
parent-teachers’ organization meeting at my daughter’s
school. As soon as I met him, I remembered something
that my wife had told me about Phil: “He’s a real pain at
meetings.” I quickly saw what she meant. When the
principal was explaining a new reading program, Phil
interrupted and asked how his son would benefit from it.
Later in the meeting, Phil argued with another parent,
unwilling to consider her point of view.
When I got home, I said to my wife, “You were right
about Phil. He’s rude and arrogant.” My wife looked at me
quizzically. “Phil isn’t the one I was telling you about,” she
said. “That was Bill. Phil is actually a very nice guy.”
Sheepishly, I thought back to the meeting and realized that
Phil had probably not interrupted or argued with people
any more than others had. Further, I realized that even
Phil’s interruption of the principal was not so clear-cut.
My interpretation was just that — an unconscious
interpretation of a behavior that was open to many
interpretations.
It is well known that first impressions are powerful,
even when they are based on . What may
not be so obvious is the extent to which the adaptive
unconscious is doing the interpreting. When I saw Phil
interrupt the principal I felt as though I was observing an
objectively rude act. I had no idea that Phil’s behavior
was being interpreted by my adaptive unconscious and
then presented to me as reality. Thus, even though I was
aware of my expectations, I had no idea how much this
expectation colored my interpretation of his behavior.
*adaptive unconscious: 적응 무의식
49. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① personal preference ② selfish motivation
③ exaggerated phrase ④ faulty information
⑤ cultural prejudice
50. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 필자는 자녀의 학교에서 열린 모임에 참석했다.
② 교장은 새로운 독서 프로그램에 대해 설명했다.
③ Phil은 교장의 발표 도중에 질문을 했다.
④ 필자의 아내는 Phil에 대해 부정적으로 이야기했다.
⑤ 필자는 Phil의 행동에 대한 판단을 정정했다.
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.

1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
①
②
③
④
⑤
2013학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 주문한 트로피를 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① joyful ② lonely ③ worried
④ determined ⑤ sympathetic
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 여행 일지 작성의 필요성
② 여행할 때 지켜야 할 안전수칙
③ 구체적 여행 일정 수립의 중요성
④ 바쁜 일상에서 여행이 필요한 이유
⑤ 디지털 카메라로 멋진 여행 사진 찍는 법
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to give her guitar lessons
② to make a talent show poster
③ to return a guitar to her teacher
④ to play a song for a charity bazaar
⑤ to serve food in the school cafeteria
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $115 ② $120 ③ $125 ④ $130 ⑤ $145
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 비타민 D 보충제의 올바른 보관방법을 조언하려고
② 비타민 D 보충제 과다 복용의 위험성을 경고하려고
③ 일상생활에서 비타민 D의 충분한 섭취를 권장하려고
④ 비타민 D 결핍 시 발생하는 증상들에 대해 알리려고
⑤ 햇빛을 통한 비타민 D의 체내 형성 과정을 설명하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to order frames for her eyeglasses
② to choose new sunglasses for her
③ to retest her eyesight
④ to confirm the price of her order
⑤ to repair the frames of her eyeglasses
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
① 소방서 ② 주유소
③ 자전거 대여소 ④ 자동차 운전학원
⑤ 중고차 판매점
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 경찰관 - 제보자
② 세탁소 주인 - 고객
③ 옷가게 점원 - 손님
④ 식당 종업원 - 요리사
⑤ 카드회사 상담원 - 회원
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 추천서 복사하기
② 추천서의 내용 수정하기
③ 우체국에서 등기 우편 수령하기
④ 대학교를 방문하여 추천서 접수하기
⑤ 추천서의 사본 제출 가능 여부 확인하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 수강할 요리 강좌를
고르시오.
12. 노트북 컴퓨터의 반납에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 7월 15일까지 반납해야 한다.
② 반납 장소는 1층의 멀티미디어실이다.
③ 반납 전 바이러스 방지 프로그램을 실행해야 한다.
④ 예치금은 반납 당일 돌려받게 된다.
⑤ 반납 지연 시 연체료는 $10이다.
제 3 교시
2 외국어(영어) 영역
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① That’s the main reason I bought it.
② I think that I shouldn’t have bought it online.
③ It’s because I need to register for a language program.
④ I wish I could speak as many different languages as you.
⑤ I also want to be a reporter for Internet-based newspapers.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① That’s a relief. I thought the test was important.
② I have the same book in my locker. I’ll go and get it.
③ Oh, I see. But I think it would be better not to drop the class.
④ I understand your situation. Can I reserve a room for you?
⑤ I agree. I think we should respect the copyright law.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I’ll cancel the reserved tickets through the website.
② Sure. I think I’ll enjoy the musical as much as you did.
③ Why not? I’ll check the theater reviews next week.
④ You should have seen it before the dental appointment.
⑤ Okay. I’ll check and let you know about the tickets.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Susie가 Mr. Adams에게 할 말로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Susie:
① I found the perfect costume for Juliet.
② I don’t think I’m talented at writing scripts.
③ I’m having trouble conveying the right feelings.
④ I wonder who will get the lead role in the play.
⑤ I didn’t expect that movie would attract so many people.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
I have always been a huge fan of Redbug Cameras.
However, when I purchased your newest model, the
Superimage 2000, I could not have been more disappointed.
I acquired it on June 3rd of this year and it does not
function correctly. The camera lens does not focus properly
and the resulting photos are blurry and unclear. I went to the
local service center to get it repaired, but the poor service
I received there only complicated the problem. I am
extremely frustrated with the poor quality repairs that were
made in addition to the overall inferior quality of the
camera. I insist on receiving a full refund. Enclosed is a
copy of the original receipt and the repair bill.
① 환불을 요구하기 위하여
② 렌즈 수리를 의뢰하기 위하여
③ 신제품으로의 교환을 요청하기 위하여
④ 품질 개선 방향을 제안하기 위하여
⑤ 구입 방법을 문의하기 위하여
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Henri Matisse came late to painting, having trained to be
a lawyer to please his father. While he was in the hospital
recovering from surgery, his mother brought ① him a box
of paints and a how-to book, and the world lost an attorney
and gained an artist. “It was as if ② I had been called,” he
remembered. “Henceforth I did not lead my life. It led me.”
Matisse left for Paris to study art, with his father shouting,
“Do you want ③ me to see you starve?” He gained fame
as leader of the Fauves’ 1905 show. In 1917 Matisse began
to spend winters in Vence, where he donated a chapel of
④ his own design that is one of the most moving religious
buildings in Europe. After local nuns nursed ⑤ him through
a serious illness in the 1940s, the grateful Matisse devoted
himself to every detail of the chapel.
* Fauve: 야수파 화가
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
Deseada is a small island which belongs to the Lesser
Antilles. This island is said to have obtained its name
from the desire Christopher Columbus felt of seeing land
on his second voyage in 1493. It is twelve miles in length
and six miles in width. The part which looks to the north
is lower than (A) it / that which looks to the south. The
island abounds greatly in iguanas, and in a species of
birds called fragatas. There is a deep cavern on the
island, containing the bones and arms of the Indians,
who, it is supposed, (B) was / were buried there. In 1762,
this island was taken by the English, (C) who / where
restored it the following year to the French by the Peace of
Paris, and since that time it has been in the possession
of the latter.
(A) (B) (C)
① it …… was …… who
② it …… were …… where
③ that …… was …… who
④ that …… were …… who
⑤ that …… were …… where
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
If you’ve ever gone snorkeling, you may ① have seen an
amazing sight: an entire school of fish suddenly changes
direction as one unit. The same goes for flocks of birds. So
are they all following the commands of a leader? Researchers
have determined that there is no leader or controlling force.
Rather, the individual fish or bird is reacting ② almost
instantly to the movements of its neighbors in the school or
flock. ③ Any individual can initiate a movement, such as a
change in direction, and this sends out a “maneuver wave,”
which spreads through the group at an astounding speed.
Because individuals can see, or sense, the wave ④ coming
toward them, they are ready to react more quickly than they
would without such advance notice. ⑤ That appears to us as
simultaneous is actually a kind of “follow your neighbor”
behavior moving faster than the eye can see.
* maneuver: 움직임
[22～23] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. To require perfection is to invite paralysis. The pattern
is predictable: as you see error in what you have done, you
steer your work toward what you imagine you can do
perfectly. You cling ever more tightly to what you already
know you can do ― away from risk and exploration, and
possibly further from the work of your heart. You find
reasons to delay, since to not work is to not make mistakes.
Believing that your work should be perfect, you gradually
become convinced that you cannot do it. (You are correct.)
Sooner or later, since you cannot do what you are trying to
do, you quit. And in one of those little ironies of life, only
the pattern itself achieves perfection ― a perfect death spiral:
you misdirect your work; you stall; you quit.
① 지나친 모험심을 멀리해야 한다.
② 완벽에 집착하면 일을 그르친다.
③ 기존 방식에서도 배울 점이 있다.
④ 처음부터 완벽한 계획을 세워야 한다.
⑤ 서두르지 않아야 실수를 줄일 수 있다.
23. A man standing on the street corner selling “nonbreakable”
pens suddenly finds that the one he is demonstrating with
breaks in half. He stops for a moment, turns to the crowd,
and declares, “Now I’ll show you what the inside looks
like.” Laughter can turn any disadvantage into an advantage.
People who know this not only look for some positive aspect
in their misfortunes but actually go one step further. After
their initial shock, they gather their resources, overcome their
problem, and see opportunities where most of us fail to see
them. Moreover, many who have experienced a major loss
often go on to achieve remarkable feats in spite of their
hardships, because they focus on what they can gain from
their circumstance rather than on what they have lost. They
believe in the old cliché that every cloud has a silver lining,
and they actively seek the advantage in their disadvantage.
① 유머로 대인 관계를 개선하라.
② 자신의 약점을 인식하라.
③ 허황된 꿈을 꾸지 마라.
④ 위기를 기회로 만들어라.
⑤ 사소한 이익에 연연하지 마라.
[24～28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. The sun is slowly getting brighter as its core contracts and
heats up. In a billion years it will be about 10 percent brighter
than today, heating the planet to an uncomfortable degree.
Water evaporating from the oceans may set off a runaway
greenhouse effect that turns Earth into a damp version of
Venus, wrapped permanently in a thick, white blanket of cloud.
Or the transformation may take some time and be more gentle,
with an increasingly hot and cloudy atmosphere able to shelter
microbial life for some time. Either way, water will escape into
the stratosphere and be broken down by UV light into oxygen
and hydrogen. Oxygen will be left in the stratosphere ―
perhaps misleading aliens into thinking the planet is still
inhabited ― while the hydrogen is light enough to escape into
space. So our water will gradually .
* microbial: 미생물의 ** stratosphere: 성층권
① leak away ② be frozen ③ flow over
④ get polluted ⑤ accumulate
25. Imagine a child playing on the beach below a cliff. He finds
a cave, and full of excitement, goes in. Suddenly fear seizes
him. In the deep dark of the cave, he cannot see the way ahead.
What is frightening him is the sense of the unknown stretching
into the black distance. Worries can be like this. Our anxiety
is not about something specific, but more of a sense that
unknown and uncertain possibilities may be out of sight far
ahead. We can stop these worries from growing. A powerful
torch or flashlight could have shown the child the limits of
the cave. We can by
asking: “What is the worst that can happen?” More often than
not, the worst that we fear is much less terrible than our vague,
unarticulated fear. Once we know the worst, we can face it
directly and work out more sensibly what to do.
① hide our fears
② increase our uncertainties
③ place limits on our worries
④ share specific worries with others
⑤ differentiate reality from the ideal
26. People have found many ways to reduce stress or control
their responses to it. Possibilities include special breathing
routines, exercise, meditation, and distraction, as well as
trying to deal with the problem that caused the stress.
Social support is one of the most powerful methods of
coping with stress, and researchers have demonstrated its
effectiveness by brain measurements as well as people’s
self-reports. In one study, happily married women were
given moderately painful shocks to their ankles. On various
trials, they held the hand of their husband, a man they did
not know, or no one. Holding the husband’s hand reduced
the response in several brain areas. Holding the hand of an
unknown man reduced the response a little, on the average,
but not as much as holding the husband’s hand. In short, as
expected, brain responses correspond to people’s self-reports
that .
① holding hands makes them feel friendlier
② exercise and meditation lessen ankle pain
③ stimulating the brain induces happier feelings
④ what matters the most is how to measure stress
⑤ social support from a loved one helps reduce stress
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
27. Lifeline infrastructures are vital systems that support a
nation’s economy and quality of life. Modern economies
rely on the ability to move goods, people, and information
safely and reliably. Adding to their importance is that
many of the lifeline systems serve vital roles in disaster
recovery. Consequently, it is of the utmost importance to
government, business, and the public at large that the
flow of services provided by a nation’s infrastructure
continues unimpeded in the face of a broad range of
natural and technological hazards. The linkage between
systems and services is critical to any discussion of
infrastructure. Although it is the performance of the
hardware (i.e., the highways, pipes, and transmission lines)
that is of immediate concern following an earthquake, it
is actually the loss of services that these systems provide
that is the real loss to the public. Therefore, a high
priority in protecting these systems from hazards is
ensuring ___________________________________.
① an early alarm system for economic crises
② the durability and stability of transmission lines
③ the continuity, or at least the rapid restoration, of service
④ a prompt mobilization of experts for disaster control
⑤ the maintenance and expansion of lifeline systems
28. Essentially the same structural forms of politics can
nevertheless take on very different “flavors.” For example,
a dictatorship can, in theory, be brutal or benevolent;
anarchy can, in theory, consist of “mutual aid” or a “war
of all against all” that proceeds in the absence of any rule
of law whatsoever; democracies can and typically are
distinguished in terms of the extent to which they are
socially oriented as opposed to individualistically oriented.
Thus, whatever our answer to the “What is the best
structural form of politics?” question, we still want to know
what “flavor” this structural form of politics ought to have
since . Indeed,
this is precisely why we vote within a democratic structure: to
determine the “flavor” we want that democratic structure to
have. [3점]
① voters ultimately determine a political structure
② political structures, in fact, outweigh political “flavors”
③ the best structural form of politics is not easy to determine
④ political structure, by itself, does not determine political content
⑤ each structural form of politics must be valued independently
[29～30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
29. The greatest errors in judging a person are made by his
parents; this is a fact, but how is one to explain it? Do the
parents have too much experience of the child, and can they
no longer compose it into a unity? We notice that travelers
in a strange land grasp correctly the common, distinctive
traits of a people only in the first period of their stay; the
more they get to know a people, the more they (A)
how to see what is typical and distinctive about it. As soon
as they see up close, they stop being farsighted. Might
parents judge their children wrongly because they have
never stood far enough off from them? A quite different
explanation would be the following: people tend to stop
thinking about things that are closest to them, and simply
(B) them. When parents are required to judge their
children, it is perhaps their customary thoughtlessness that
makes them judge so mistakenly. [3점]
(A) (B)
① forget …… accept
② learn …… ignore
③ seek …… conceal
④ neglect …… analyze
⑤ understand …… embrace
30. Persuasion is the strategic use of language to move an
audience. It works by appealing to our emotion as well as
by appealing to our reason. Therefore, sometimes you
may try to appeal to an emotion in your audience by
imitating it: hysteria by being hysterical, anger by raging.
(A) , you may try to re-create the circumstances
which excited in you the emotions that you want to excite in
your audience. However, the best measure is to appear calm,
detached, thoroughly in control of your feelings, while
you are controlling your narrative for your own purposes.
Even your choice of words should be selective; you must pay
attention to their nuances. If you address a labor union,
(B) , it will make a great difference whether you
refer to the members as workers, comrades, or just people.
(A) (B)
① In short …… in addition
② By contrast …… in addition
③ Hence …… however
④ Nevertheless …… for example
⑤ Also …… for example
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
The growing season in the Arctic region is short as well
as cool, and plants must make the most of what warmth there
is. One (A) addiction / adaptation by many arctic plants to
the short growing season is wintergreen, or semi-evergreen,
leaves. They are leaves that develop late in the summer and
survive through winter without drying up and dying. They
remain green and can start photosynthesis as soon as the
weather is warm enough in spring, before there has been time
for the new season’s leaves to expand and start functioning.
They finally (B) wither / prosper after the new leaves have
taken over. There are many common arctic plants with
wintergreen leaves. Among them are arctic poppy, thrift,
alpine saxifrage, and several kinds of chickweeds and starworts.
Wintergreen leaves are not (C) limited / accustomed to the
Arctic; many plants of the northern forests have them, too.
(A) (B) (C)
① addiction …… wither …… accustomed
② addiction …… prosper …… limited
③ adaptation …… wither …… limited
④ adaptation …… prosper …… limited
⑤ adaptation …… prosper …… accustomed
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Organic food production is growing by leaps and bounds.
Many consumers are willing to pay premium prices for organic
foods, convinced that they are helping the earth and eating
healthier. Some experts say, however, that organic farming has
some ① drawbacks. One of the most frequent criticisms is
that the crop yields of organic farms are much ② lower than
those of traditional farms. That’s because organic fields suffer
more from weeds and insects than ③ conventional fields.
Another argument often offered by experts is that organic
farming can supply food for niche markets of ④ wealthy
consumers but cannot feed billions of hungry people around
the globe. Only the careful use of chemical inputs, not the
costly organic methods, can help ⑤ reduce food production
significantly in the countries facing hunger.
* niche market: 틈새시장
[33～34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. What everyday rules for behavior guide parents’ efforts
to socialize their toddlers and preschool-age children? To
answer this question, Gralinski and Kopp observed and
interviewed mothers and their children in these age groups.
They found that for fifteen-month-olds, mothers’ rules and
requests centered on ensuring the children’s safety and, to a
lesser extent, protecting the families’ possessions from harm;
respecting basic social niceties (“Don’t bite”; “No kicking”);
and learning to delay getting what they wanted. As children’s
ages and cognitive sophistication increased, the numbers and
kinds of prohibitions and requests expanded from the original
focus on child protection and interpersonal issues to family
routines, self-care, and other concerns regarding the child’s
independence. By the time children were three, a new quality
of rule emerged: “Do not scream in a restaurant, run around
naked in front of company, or pick your nose.”
① changes in maternal rules according to children’s age
② limitations of discipline for children’s socialization
③ parents’ concerns about children’s independence
④ importance of parents’ anger management skills
⑤ effects of thinking ability on children’s socialization
34. Ancient Greek and Roman costume is essentially draped,
and presents a traditional stability and permanence. While it
received certain fashions over the centuries, it never
underwent any major transformation. Léon Heuzey, the
pioneer of the study of classical costume, set forth with
exemplary clarity its two basic principles: the first is that
Classical costume has no form in itself, as it consisted of
a simple rectangular piece of cloth woven in varying sizes
according to its intended use and the height of the customer,
without differentiation between the sexes; the second is that
this cloth is always draped, never shaped or cut, and was
worn round the body in accordance with definite rules. Thus
it was always fluid and ‘live.’ It is notable that we find no
evidence in Classical times of tailors or dressmakers: the
word itself barely exists in Greek or Latin.
* drape: 주름을 잡아 걸치다
① basic characteristics of Classical costume
② significant transformations in Classical costume
③ the greatness of Léon Heuzey’s study of classical costume
④ the origin of ancient Greek and Roman costume
⑤ difficulties in defining Classical costume
35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
This graph shows the number of U.S. Science and
Engineering (S & E) doctoral degrees earned by students
from China, India, South Korea, and Taiwan from 1987 to
2007. ① In 1987, Taiwan had the largest number of S & E
doctoral degree recipients from U.S. institutions while China
had the least. ② However, China quickly caught up to the
other countries by 1990, and has since produced the most
U.S. S & E doctoral degree recipients of the four Asian
countries. ③ Between 2001 and 2005, more U.S. S & E
doctorates were given to South Korean students than to their
Indian peers. ④ What is noticeable is that since the early
1990s, all four countries have consistently showed a steady
increase in the number of U.S. S & E doctoral degree
recipients. ⑤ From 1987 to 2007, none of the four Asian
countries broke the barrier of receiving 5,000 U.S. S & E
doctorates in a single year, but China came closest when it
received 4,500 in 2007.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
36. Patience Lovell Wright에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Patience Lovell Wright was a successful artist who specialized
in creating wax figures of famous people. Although Patience
had received little formal education and what she knew
about art was mostly self-taught, she was very skilled, and
her work quickly became popular. She was also a devoted
Patriot. When the war broke out, she immediately began to
work for the Continental Army. She easily picked up
information not only from her clients but also from women
with whom she socialized often. Patience thrived on danger.
Toward the end of the American Revolution, she became
deeply involved in a plot to overthrow the king. Without
financial backing, the plotters were forced to abandon their
plan. Patience consoled herself by recognizing the part she
had played in the American Revolution as one of the
Patriots’ most colorful spies.
* Patriot: (독립전쟁 당시의) 애국단원
① 평범한 사람들의 밀랍 모형을 만드는 성공한 예술가였다.
② 정규 교육을 통해 예술에 관한 대부분을 알았다.
③ 전쟁이 끝날 무렵부터 Continental Army에서 일했다.
④ 종종 친교를 나누었던 여성들로부터 정보를 쉽게 얻었다.
⑤ 왕을 폐위시키려는 음모에 가담하지 않았다.
37. jerboa에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The small jerboa lives in deserts across the world. Jerboas
have big eyes and, like many desert animals, they can see
very well at night. In the late evening, they come out of
their holes and look for food ― mostly seeds and plants.
Jerboas are very well adapted to life in the desert. Some
jerboas do not need to drink, because they get water from
their food. In the hot summer, some jerboas sleep under the
sand for two or three months. Jerboas also live in cold
deserts like the Gobi. Here, they sleep in their holes in the
winter and stay away from the snow. Jerboas can move
very fast across the sand. They have huge back legs and
they can jump up to three meters in one move. They do
this when they need to run away from other animals.
① 눈이 크고 밤에 매우 잘 볼 수 있다.
② 주로 씨앗과 식물을 먹이로 찾는다.
③ 추운 사막에서도 산다.
④ 모래 위에서는 움직임이 둔해진다.
⑤ 커다란 뒷다리를 가지고 있다.
38. 다음 글에서 ‘I’가 겪은 심경의 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
I am a female dolphin who lives in an aquarium. One day
I got so badly injured that I couldn’t swim and come up for
air. So my trainers attached bottles to me to act as floats.
I didn’t want to live the rest of my life being supported by
these bottles. I was so aimless and dispirited. I merely
floated about and was sure I wasn’t going to live for very
long. Seeing my depression, my trainers brought in a male
dolphin. At first I ignored him but later began to show
interest. He tried to help me swim, pushing me from under
and bringing me to the surface. Despite my injury, I began
making an effort to swim. Soon, the bottles were removed
and I recovered completely. It felt great to swim on my
own again. We became inseparable, swimming joyfully
around together and showing signs of affection.
① hopeless → happy
② satisfied → worried
③ confused → envious
④ alarmed → regretful
⑤ nervous → disheartened
[39～40] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. The streets of New York are home to numerous trucks,
vans, stands, and pushcarts all selling food. Most of the
vendors are immigrants bringing street versions of the
world’s diverse food traditions to this already international
metropolis. You can snack on Jamaican goat patties, sample
Chinese noodles, take a bite of Egyptian falafel, or enjoy
vegetarian Sri Lankan curry. New York even has an annual
award ceremony, the Vendy Awards, for the best sidewalk
chefs. Part of the fun is tracking down the best offerings.
Trucks and vans often visit different areas of New York on
different days; some chefs operate only at certain times of
day or only on weekends. Even stands with regular spots and
hours occasionally vanish, as the owner finds a better spot
or takes a week off. Follow the crowds, or ask locals for
information ― hotel doormen will often let you into the
secrets of a neighborhood’s best vendors.
① New York: A Hub of Grocery Transportation
② Vendy Awards for the Best-Selling Street Food
③ Origins of International Street Foods in New York
④ New York: A Paradise for Street Food Lovers
⑤ Famous Street Food for New York Drivers
40. Fourteenth-century approaches to music had a profound
and continuing impact on music in later centuries. Perhaps
most significant was the invention of a precise and
unambiguous notation that could record a wide variety of
rhythms and allowed music to be distributed in writing and
performed accurately wherever it went. We now take this
for granted when we play from notation and sight-read through
unfamiliar music, but it was a remarkable innovation in the
fourteenth century. Among its effects was that composers
could fix their music exactly as they wished it to be
performed, leading them to take pride in authorship. The
increased interest in the individual and in satisfying the
human senses that was characteristic of the age grew
stronger in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and has
remained important ever since.
① History of Music in Terms of Genre
② Authorship: Motivation for Innovations
③ Greatest Composers of 14th Century Music
④ The Innovative Invention of Musical Instruments
⑤ Musical Notation: Its Invention and Contributions
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
[41～42] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
41. According to sociologists, one of the most widespread and
basic norms of human culture is embodied in the rule for
reciprocation. ① The rule requires that one person try to
repay, in kind, what another person has provided. ② By
obligating the recipient of an act to repayment in the future,
the rule for reciprocation allows one individual to give
something to another with confidence that it is not being lost.
③ Sociologists have a desire to be consistent with their
words, beliefs, attitudes, and deeds. ④ This sense of future
obligation within the rule makes possible the development
of various kinds of continuing relationships, transactions, and
exchanges that are beneficial to the society. ⑤ Consequently,
all members of the society are trained from childhood to
follow the rule or suffer serious social disapproval.
* reciprocation: 보답
42. Several plane crashes and near crashes have been attributed
to dangerous downward wind bursts known as wind shear.
These wind bursts generally result from high-speed downdrafts
in the turbulence of thunderstorms, but they can occur in
clear air when rain evaporates high above the ground. ① The
downdraft spreads out when it hits the ground and forms an
inward circular pattern. ② A plane entering the pattern
experiences an unexpected upward headwind that lifts the
plane. ③ Special radar systems are being installed at major
airports to detect the location of unpredictable thunderstorms.
④ To resist it, the pilot often cuts speed and lowers the
plane’s nose to compensate. ⑤ Further into the circular
pattern, the wind quickly turns downward, and an airplane
can suddenly lose altitude and possibly crash when it is near
the ground, as upon landing.
* wind shear: 갑자기 방향이 바뀌는 돌풍
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
The underlying idea of world history is that the interaction
among human societies resembles not the relationships
among billiard balls, but rather among bacteria.
(A) Similarly, human societies in contact affect each other’s
development. World historians, recognizing this, seek
to understand human history through studying both
developments within societies and the way in which
societies relate to each other.
(B) Bacteria, however, fundamentally shape each other as
they interact. Because the membranes covering bacteria
are full of pores, bacteria can exchange genetic
information and can even fundamentally alter each
other’s basic make-up when they touch.
(C) Billiard balls rolling around the table may collide and
affect each other’s trajectories, but they do not actually
change each other: The eight ball is an eight ball even
after it is struck by the cue ball.
* membrane: 얇은 막 ** trajectory: 궤도
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
In one troop, a taste for caramels was developed by
introducing this new food into the diet of young minors,
low on the status ladder.
We are not the only species to give sometimes wrongheaded
deference to those in authority positions. ( ① ) In monkey
colonies, where rigid dominance hierarchies exist, beneficial
innovations do not spread quickly through the group unless
they are taught first to a dominant animal. ( ② ) When a
lower animal is taught the new concept first, the rest of the
colony remains mostly oblivious to its value. ( ③ ) One
study on the introduction of new food tastes to Japanese
monkeys provides a nice illustration. ( ④ ) The taste for
caramels inched slowly up the ranks: A year and a half later,
only 51 percent of the colony had acquired it, and still none
of the leaders. ( ⑤ ) Contrast this with what happened in a
second troop where wheat was introduced first to the leader:
Wheat eating ― to this point unknown to these monkeys ―
spread through the whole colony within four hours.
* deference: 복종 ** oblivious: 알아차리지 못하는
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
All art is creation, regardless of how closely the
imitation approximates the original. Even the most
rigorous attempt to create an absolute likeness is
ultimately selective. Doing a portrait, for example, the
artist may ask the subject to look serious, not smile ―
selecting a certain aspect of the person. We know Mona
Lisa Giaconda, the subject of the most famous portrait
in the world, through her mysterious smile; but we will
never know what the entire person was like. The
treasure of art, however, is that its reality lives forever.
The final product is really an addition to reality, not
simply a way of totally reproducing it. The artist always
contributes something new, something that never was
put together in precisely that way before. Leonardo’s
Mona Lisa is not Mona Lisa. The latter has long since
gone to her reward; the former will never die.
󰀻
Every work of art, no matter how precisely it (A)
the original, is not a mere reproduction, but a unique
creation that exists on its own and never (B) .
(A) (B)
① reveals …… compromises
② imitates …… perishes
③ illustrates …… returns
④ recalls …… stands alone
⑤ verifies …… goes unnoticed
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
The first memory I have of visiting a working artist’s
studio is a trip my family took to the studio of (a) Grey
Stone, a potter who made the dinnerware set our whole
family has cherished for many years. When I was about
five years old, our family drove down to his studio
with several miscellaneous pieces of handmade pottery
from the family collection. We wanted Grey to make a
set that would draw together the pieces we had collected
over the years.
(B)
A favorite family pastime then developed when guests
came over and we got out the “good stoneware.” Before
my father served the food, (b) he would encourage
guests to flip over their plates to read what was on the
underside. Thanks to his influence, this childhood pastime
has since become a habit. Even today, I still flip over
all handmade pottery pieces as soon as I first touch
them to see if there might be an inscription or at least
to look for the potter’s mark.
(C)
Even at that young age, looking around Grey’s house
and studio complex, I thought about how great it was that
he could work at home, with (c) his family around him,
and produce things with his own hands. After accepting
our request, he immediately started working on one of the
pieces. Taking a prepared lump of clay, (d) he put it on
his treadle wheel. It was so fascinating to see how
ordinary clay could turn into a beautiful pot.
(D)
I couldn’t get that process out of my head so I looked
forward to our return trip several months later to pick up
the finished dinnerware. One of my favorite features of
each piece Grey had made was that, upon close
inspection, one could see that the pieces had been
individually inscribed with some marks on the underside,
just inside the trimmed foot. On each of those pieces,
with the large foot area, there was room for the
inscription not only of (e) the potter’s signature, address,
and date, but also a unique saying or phrase.
46. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
48. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 필자는 다섯 살 무렵에 Grey Stone의 작업실을 방문하였다.
② 필자의 가족은 도자기 그릇을 수집해오고 있었다.
③ 필자는 아버지의 영향으로 접시를 뒤집어 보는 습관을 갖게
되었다.
④ 필자는 Grey Stone의 집 방문 시 그가 작업하는 것을 보지
못했다.
⑤ Grey Stone이 만들어 준 그릇의 밑바닥에는 표식이 새겨져
있었다.
[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
All his life, Chris Greicius dreamed of becoming a
police officer. But there was a major obstacle standing
in his way. He had leukemia and was not expected to
make it to adulthood. When he was seven years old,
Chris’s disease got worse. That’s when a family friend,
Tommy Austin, arranged for Chris to come as close as
he could to . He called
Officer Ron Cox and arranged for Chris to spend a day
with some police officers.
When the day arrived, Chris was welcomed by three
squad cars and a police motorcycle ridden by Officer
Frank Shankwitz. Then, he was treated to a ride in a
police helicopter. The officers finished the day by
swearing Chris in as the first ― and only ― honorary
state trooper. The next day, Cox presented Chris with an
official Arizona Highway Patrol uniform. With a smile
that lit up the room, he accepted it.
Two days later, Chris died in the hospital, his uniform
close at hand. Shankwitz was very sad, but grateful that
he had helped Chris. He also realized that there were
many other children like Chris. That prompted Shankwitz
to co-found the Make-A-Wish Foundation. It has now
become the largest wish-granting organization in the world,
enlarging the experiences of more than eighty thousand
children.
* leukemia: 백혈병
49. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① A Boy Trooper in Uniform Dies of Leukemia
② A Boy’s Wish Blossoms into a Foundation
③ A Badge of Honor Saves Thousands of Children
④ A Lingering Illness: Can the Boy Survive It?
⑤ An Everlasting Smile: The Story of a Police Officer
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① living his dream
② making a promise
③ visiting his relatives
④ recovering from his illness
⑤ helping other children in the hospital

1
8
2013학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 선풍기를 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① proud ② grateful ③ confident
④ frustrated ⑤ indifferent
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 기업화된 동물 사육의 문제점
② 채식 위주 음식 섭취의 장점
③ 축산업 지원의 필요성
④ 건강을 위한 식단 구성 방법
⑤ 채소 재배와 환경보호의 관계
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 설문 참가자에게 전화하기
② 새로운 설문 문항 만들기
③ 설문 자료 분석하기
④ 사회 과목 보고서 제출하기
⑤ 학급 친구 전화번호 알아보기
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $45 ② $81 ③ $90 ④ $95 ⑤ $100
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 미술 과제물 제출 방법을 안내하려고
② 국제기구 주관의 전시회를 홍보하려고
③ 금연의 날 지정의 필요성을 설명하려고
④ 금연 포스터 공모전 참여를 독려하려고
⑤ 병원 설립을 위한 모금 행사를 소개하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to subscribe to his magazine
② to write a response to the article
③ to perform plastic surgery on him
④ to shorten her article for the magazine
⑤ to email her hospital information to him
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오. [1점]
① 농장 ② 주차장 ③ 지하철
④ 구내식당 ⑤ 정육점
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 약사 － 환자 ② 동물원 조련사 － 관람객
③ 보건 교사 － 학생 ④ 슈퍼마켓 점원 － 손님
⑤ 수의사 － 애완동물 주인
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to take old books to the Good Hands store
② to help reorganize the charity shop
③ to call the town recycling center
④ to return Amy’s books to her school
⑤ to exchange a bookshelf for a bigger one
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 예약할 캠프장을
고르시오.
12. 다음을 듣고, Pacific Language Learning에 관한 내용과
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 2010년에 만들어진 무료 프로그램이다.
② 중국어, 스페인어 그리고 프랑스어 과정이 있다.
③ 스마트폰을 통해서는 학습 도구를 제공하지 않는다.
④ 말하기 대회를 매년 12월에 개최한다.
⑤ 말하기 대회 우승자는 외국을 방문할 기회를 얻는다.
제 3 교시
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 외국어(영어) 영역
2
8
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Thanks to you, I managed to get the tickets.
② Well, let’s meet at the restaurant in one hour.
③ Great! I’m really looking forward to seeing you.
④ Really? You should have seen the show with me.
⑤ No thanks. I have to leave for New York right now.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I bought tickets through the official website.
② You can take subway Line 5 to the stadium.
③ The Vikings beat their rival team last night.
④ I don’t know when they became fan club members.
⑤ I’ll get a helmet for you while you stay here in line.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① There’s one in the basement.
② It’s a simple job to clean the sink.
③ My dad taught me how to tighten the nut.
④ Call a plumber to fix the toilet right away.
⑤ Please go to the hardware store for a new pipe.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Anita가 Mr. Robinson에게 할 말로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Anita:
① I’m calling to confirm that my flight will be on time.
② I’m so thrilled to be staying with your family.
③ I’ll pick you up as soon as you arrive.
④ I’d like to major in mechanical engineering.
⑤ I’m afraid my plane will arrive later than expected.
18. 다음 편지를 쓴 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Dear Mr. Johnson,
I can’t tell you how sorry I was to learn that the flood
caused almost total damage to your home. I can only
imagine what a terrible loss it must be. The very
prospect of losing everything and having to start all over
again would be overwhelming for anybody. That is why
I want to provide you with any assistance that I can. I
have an extra bedroom that you are welcome to use. As
your friends and neighbors join forces to support you in
your time of need, I’m sure that everything will seem a
little brighter with each new day. In the meantime, please
take good care of yourself.
With all good wishes,
Richard Jackson
① to offer help ② to ask for advice
③ to express thanks ④ to give a warning
⑤ to make an apology
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
A king once boarded a galley ship. As he passed the crew
of slaves, ① he asked several of them what their offenses
were. Almost every man claimed he was innocent. They laid
the blame on someone else. One young fellow, however,
spoke out, “Sire, ② I deserve to be here. I stole some money.
No one is at fault but myself. I’m guilty.” Upon hearing this,
the king seized ③ him by the shoulder and shouted, “You
scoundrel! What are ④ you doing here with all these honest
men? Get out of their company at once!” He was then set
free. The key to this prisoner’s freedom was the admission
of ⑤ his guilt.
* galley ship: 갤리선(옛날 노예나 죄수들에게 젓게 한 돛배)
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
Remember what it was like to report on a daily deadline
for the first time? Or to interview a city official for the first
time? Or to begin to maneuver a desktop publishing
program? We know that the journalism program at our
college was a source of (A) many / much of these firsts for
you. We’re still providing these important first experiences
to budding young writers and editors. And we’re hoping
you’ll be willing to help these students make it through the
program. As you know, the costs of providing first-rate
education just keep going up. We’ve done everything we can
(B) contain / to contain costs without compromising quality.
One of those things is to set up a scholarship fund for
students with special financial needs. We hope you would
consider contributing generously to our fund. You’ll get a
great feeling (C) known / knowing you’re helping support
the formation of future leaders in the profession.
(A) (B) (C)
① many …… contain …… known
② many …… contain …… knowing
③ many …… to contain …… knowing
④ much …… contain …… knowing
⑤ much …… to contain …… known
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Today, the world of innovation is far different from what
it was a century ago. The days of the solitary inventor working
on his own are gone. To oversimplify, basic ideas bubble out
of universities and laboratories ① in which a group of
researchers work together: both major breakthroughs, like
understanding the genetic structure of life, and smaller
② ones, such as advances in mathematics or basic chemistry.
Traditionally, intellectual property has played little role in
③ promoting basic science. Academia believes in “open
architecture,” meaning ④ that the knowledge that research
produces should be made public to encourage innovation. The
great scientists are driven by an inner quest to understand the
nature of the universe; the extrinsic reward that matters most
to them ⑤ are the recognition of their peers.
[22～23] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. We often dismiss new ideas that could further our growth
simply because they do not fit within the general framework
of our preconceived notions and self-concepts. An enormous
amount of time is spent simply reacting. It’s as if we are
robots programmed to respond on cue to whatever demands
the least time and attention, and disregard anything that
requires putting in extra time and energy to think. We skim
over the surface thoughtlessly. But we must acknowledge
that thinking well is a time-consuming process. We can’t
expect instant results. We have to slow down a bit and take
the time to contemplate and meditate. It is the only path to
a more meaningful and efficient existence.
① 우선순위에 따라 일을 처리하라.
② 위기의 순간에는 과감히 결정하라.
③ 충분한 시간을 갖고 심사숙고하라.
④ 선입견을 버리고 객관성을 유지하라.
⑤ 결정한 일은 지체하지 말고 실행하라.
23. Masks are too heavy to uphold indefinitely, and no matter
how well you believe you are disguising yourself, others
always know. The consequences are that you waste energy,
sacrifice productivity, and lose people’s trust. In our study,
all of the CEOs were concerned that dropping their masks
would make them appear weak. In every case, however, the
leader’s subordinates perceived the removal of the mask as
an act of strength and courage. This, in turn, encouraged a
culture where those subordinates did the same, creating a
snowball effect. Some of the ways we helped the CEOs
remove their masks were to actually name the masks,
explore the significant personal and professional costs of
upholding them, and ask the CEOs to reflect on the leader
they most admired. At this point each of the CEOs was ready
to rebuild a leadership identity based on values, strengths,
and ambitions.
① CEO가 되기 위해서는 전문성을 갖추어야 한다.
② CEO는 열정적이고, 희생적이며, 신뢰감을 주어야 한다.
③ CEO는 부하 직원에게 나약한 모습을 보여서는 안 된다.
④ CEO는 자신을 그대로 보여줌으로써 리더십을 재정립할 수 있다.
⑤ CEO의 리더십은 자신이 존경하는 지도자를 모방함으로써 생긴다.
[24～28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. When we behave irrationally, our behavior usually seems
reasonable to us. When challenged, the mind says (to itself),
“Why are these people giving me a hard time? I’m just doing
what makes sense. Any reasonable person would see that!”
In short, we naturally think that our thinking is fully justified.
As far as we can tell, we are only doing what is right and
proper and reasonable. Any fleeting thoughts suggesting that
we might be at fault typically are by more
powerful self-justifying thoughts: “I don’t mean any harm.
I’m just! I’m fair! It’s the others who are wrong!” It is
important to recognize this nature of the human mind as its
natural state. In other words, humans don’t have to learn
self-justifying, self-serving, self-deceptive thinking and
behavior. These patterns are innate in every one of us.
① spread ② unveiled ③ fortified
④ overcome ⑤ authorized
25. At some point, these days, a parent realizes his or her
child is tending left. The parent panics. Will the child be
made fun of? Struggle with writing? Be left out? In the past,
the parent would have done everything possible to exorcise
the tendency. Today, more and more parents shrug their
shoulders, saying it’s okay, maybe even something special.
Or their attempts to discourage it are milder. This is not an
isolated reaction. It’s part of the larger trend toward
. From giving
children extra time to develop into kindergarteners to
accommodating their vegetarian appetites, parents today are
taking their cues from children, rather than the other way
around. Left-handedness is just the tip of the iceberg ― in
today’s world, parenting is about letting your child develop
into his or her own person, not about trying to stamp him
or her into a mold of conformity.
* exorcise: 몰아내다
① neglecting, rather than enhancing, personal traits
② celebrating, rather than suppressing, individuality in kids
③ abandoning, rather than administering, parental supervision
④ analyzing, rather than overlooking, their child’s mischief
⑤ advocating, rather than blaming, early education
26. It is a common misconception among many musicians and
non-musicians alike that .
This is not surprising as it is natural to associate music with
the sounds that create the melody, rather than with the quiet
spaces between the notes. Because rests are silent, people
often misinterpret these empty spaces as unimportant. But,
imagine what would happen if a song was made up of only
notes, and no rests. Aside from the fact that the “rests would
be history” (pun intended), there would be a wall of sound
with no reference point or discernible backbone to the music.
This is because the spaces between the sounds provide a
baseline and contrast for the piece, and give music structure
and texture. In fact, it is a common saying among experienced
musicians that a full measure of rest can hold more music
than a full measure of blistering notes. [3점]
① notes are more important than rests
② rests provide a direct reference point to music
③ silence is no less meaningful than sound in music
④ melody is nothing more than a collection of sounds
⑤ structure and texture are the most crucial aspects of music
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4
8
27. Cost estimates follow from time estimates simply by
multiplying the hours required by the required labor rates.
Beware of . For
example, one major company has a policy that requires the
following personnel in order to remove an electric motor: a
tinsmith to remove the cover, an electrician to disconnect
the electrical supply, a millwright to unbolt the mounts, and
one or more laborers to remove the motor from its mount.
That situation is fraught with inefficiency and high labor
costs, since all four trades must be scheduled together, with
at least three people watching while the fourth is at work.
The cost will be at least four times what it could be and is
often greater if one of the trades does not show up on time.
* fraught: ～으로 가득 찬
① inefficiency caused by poor working conditions
② difficulty in financing high labor costs in business
③ differences in labor skills when working in groups
④ coordination problems where multiple crafts are involved
⑤ mismatch between personnel and equipment in production
28. Guys lost on unfamiliar streets often avoid asking for
directions from locals. We try to tough it out with map and
compass. Admitting being lost feels like admitting stupidity.
This is a stereotype, but it has a large grain of truth. It’s
also a good metaphor for a big overlooked problem in the
human sciences. We’re trying to find our way around the dark
continent of human nature. We scientists are being paid to
be the bus-driving tour guides for the rest of humanity. They
expect us to know our way around the human mind, but we
don’t. So we try to fake it, without asking the locals for
directions. We try to find our way from first principles of
geography (‘theory’), and from maps of our own making
(‘empirical research’). The roadside is crowded with locals,
and their brains are crowded with local knowledge, but we
are too arrogant and embarrassed to ask the way. So we drive
around in circles,
about where to find the scenic vistas that would entertain and
enlighten the tourists. [3점]
① waiting for the local brains to inquire
② accumulating and examining the locals’ knowledge
③ going against the findings of our empirical research
④ relying on passengers’ knowledge and experience
⑤ inventing and rejecting successive hypotheses
[29～30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
29. One day as he walked through the streets of London,
Thomas Hobbes, the seventeenth-century philosopher, came
upon an old, sickly man who was begging for money.
Hobbes, his heart touched, immediately gave the man a
generous offering. When asked by a friend if he would have
done the same had there been no religious dictum or
philosophical principle about helping the needy, Hobbes
replied that he would. His explanation: he felt some
(A) himself when he saw the man’s misery, and so
just as giving money to the man would relieve some of the
man’s suffering, it “does also ease me.” This tale suggests
that we have a bit of self-interest in relieving the misery of
others. One school of modern economic theory, following
Hobbes, argues that people give to charities in part because
of the (B) they get from imagining either the relief
of those they benefit or their own relief from alleviating their
sympathetic distress.
* alleviate: 완화시키다
(A) (B)
① pain …… pleasure
② contempt …… respect
③ doubt …… trust
④ humility …… dignity
⑤ hostility …… friendliness
30. While there are aesthetic and ethical reasons for
preserving biodiversity, there are practical considerations as
well. We depend on many other species for food, clothing,
shelter, oxygen, soil fertility ― the list goes on and on. In
the United States, 25% of all prescriptions from pharmacies
contain substances derived from plants. (A) , two
substances effective against Hodgkin’s disease and certain
other forms of cancer come from the rosy periwinkle, a
flowering plant native to the island of Madagascar.
Madagascar alone harbors some 8,000 species of flowering
plants. Unfortunately, Madagascar has lost 80% of its
forests and about 50% of its native species. Madagascar’s
dilemma represents that of much of the developing world.
The island is home to over 10 million people, most of
whom are desperately poor and hardly in a position to be
concerned with environmental conservation. (B)
the people of Madagascar as well as others around the
globe could derive vital benefits from the biodiversity that
is being destroyed.
(A) (B)
① In contrast …… Indeed
② In contrast …… Thus
③ In short …… Finally
④ For instance …… Yet
⑤ For instance …… Similarly
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
31. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Over the course of the past forty years, no country on earth
has cut its alcohol consumption more than France. While
consumption of beer and spirits has stayed basically steady
in France, the per capita consumption of alcohol from wine
① fell from 20 liters in 1962 to about 8 in 2001. One reason
for the dwindling wine consumption is the ② acceleration of
the French meal. In 1978, the average French meal lasted 82
minutes. ③ Plenty of time for half a bottle, if not a whole
bottle. Today, the average French meal has been slashed
down to 38 minutes. Wine is a ④ victim of the disappearance
of the leisurely meal. It is not the target of the change, but
the decline in wine consumption is a ⑤ cause of the
emergence of the faster, more modern, on-the-go lifestyle.
* spirits: 독한 술
32. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
One of the most commonly cited reasons for keeping a pet
animal is for the companionship it can provide. The general
term companionship usually translates into partaking in
shared activities, such as walking the dog, playing with the
cat. However, such behavioral interactions between humans
and pet animals are usually asymmetrically organized.
Humans tend to interact with their pets when they feel like
it, rather than (A) consistently / occasionally responding to
the animal’s demands for attention. In addition, it is often
observed that once interaction between humans and pets has
arisen, the termination of such interactional sequences
invariably (B) originates / separates from the human. This
suggests that activities like walking the dog and playing with
the cat only arise when time can be spared from the human
owner’s other commitments. Therefore, if one views activity
as a global concept ― involving instigation, performance, and
termination ― labeling certain forms of human-pet interaction
as shared activities may be (C) appealing / misleading .
* instigation: (～하도록) 부추김
(A) (B) (C)
① consistently …… originates …… appealing
② consistently …… originates …… misleading
③ consistently …… separates …… appealing
④ occasionally …… originates …… misleading
⑤ occasionally …… separates …… appealing
[33～34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. We sometimes encounter students who come to our offices
and ask how they could have worked so hard but still failed
our tests. They usually tell us that they read and reread the
textbook and their class notes, and that they thought they
understood everything well by the time of the exam. And they
probably did internalize some bits and pieces of the material,
but the illusion of knowledge led them to confuse the
familiarity they had gained from repeated exposure to the
concepts in the course with an actual understanding of them.
As a rule, reading text over and over again yields diminishing
returns in actual knowledge, but it increases familiarity and
fosters a false sense of understanding. Only by testing
ourselves can we actually determine whether or not we really
understand. That is one reason why teachers give tests, and
why the best tests probe knowledge at a deep level.
① positive impact of student counseling on study skills
② importance of familiarity in gaining actual understanding
③ relationship between reading and gaining high test scores
④ tests as a means to distinguish real understanding from
familiarity
⑤ necessity of internalizing reading materials to improve test
scores
34. Hundreds of species of small fishes exist in well-defined
social organizations called schools. Fish schools vary in size
from a few individuals to enormous populations extending
over several square kilometers. Schools usually consist of a
single species, with all members similar in size or age. For
small animals with no other means of individual defense,
schooling behavior provides a degree of protection. Predatory
fishes have less chance of encountering prey if the prey are
members of a school because the individuals of the prey
species are concentrated in compact units rather than
dispersed over a much larger area. Moreover, once a predator
encounters a school, satiation of the predator enables most
members of the school to escape unharmed. Large numbers
of fishes in a school may achieve additional survival
advantages by confusing predators with continually shifting
and changing positions; they might even discourage hungry
predators with the illusion of an impressively large and
formidable opponent.
* satiation: 물릴 정도로 먹음, 포만
① protective instincts of small fish species
② origin of social organizations in small fishes
③ fish schooling as a behavioral strategy for survival
④ necessity of fish farms to save endangered species
⑤ behavioral differences between predatory fishes and prey
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6
8
35. 다음 글에 드러난 Liz의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Over the sky a plump black cloud moved, erasing the
stars. At that moment, Liz heard a stealthy step far to her
left and immediately froze. She slowly released her knees
and straightened her head, the better to hear. The movement
stopped, and after a long moment began again. Liz saw a
dark figure creep into the open and draw near to the trees.
The figure stood so still and low to the ground that it might
have been a stump. She called softly, “Tim!” Hearing an
answering whistle, she went toward her son and, with tears
of delight, hugged him tightly.
① lonely → scared
② tense → relieved
③ sorrowful → ashamed
④ anticipating → depressed
⑤ disappointed → overjoyed
36. Macon에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Imagine the Titanic floating overhead: That’s what it
would have been like to see the USS Macon fly by. Nearly
800 feet long, the airship was completed in 1933 as part of
an effort to equip the U.S. Navy with airborne military bases.
With an onboard hangar, Macon was capable of launching
five small fixed-wing planes in midair. But it never saw
action and went down off California’s Big Sur coast during
a storm in 1935. Rediscovered in 1980 when a fisherman
caught a piece of the airship’s debris in his net, the wreck
was recently surveyed and mapped using sonar and remotely
operated robots. Government archaeologists continue to
explore the unique site, which lies in 1,500 feet of water.
* hangar: 격납고
① 1933년에 만들기 시작한 군사 기지였다.
② 해상에서 대형 비행기들을 발진시킬 수 있었다.
③ 1935년 작전 수행 중 폭풍으로 인하여 귀환하였다.
④ 잔해가 어부의 그물에 걸려서 발견되었다.
⑤ 고고학자들에 의해 탐색이 완료되었다.
37. Warren McArthur에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Warren McArthur graduated from Cornell in 1908 with a
degree in mechanical engineering. He began working in the
budding field of industrial design ― patenting ten lamps
between 1911 and 1914. He moved to Arizona in 1913,
where he and his brother opened car dealerships. Warren
originally ventured into furniture design and construction as
a hobby, but at age 44, he moved to Los Angeles to design
and manufacture metal furniture. He was among the
pioneers in the use of aluminum for furniture, and his
contribution included improvements and patents to facilitate
mass production. He relocated his factory back East to New
York in 1933 where he designed and manufactured unique
aluminum furniture.
① Cornell에서 기계공학 학위를 취득했다.
② 1911년부터 1914년 사이에 램프에 대한 특허를 받았다.
③ Arizona에서 친구들과 함께 자동차 정비소를 열었다.
④ 가구 디자인을 처음에는 취미로 했었다.
⑤ New York에서 알루미늄 가구를 제작했다.
38. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the trends of snow sports participation
in the four winter seasons from 2006/2007 to 2009/2010 in
the U.S. ① Alpine skiing had the most participants and
snowboarding had the second most across all four winter
seasons. ② Freestyle skiing, however, had the least participants
in each of the four seasons. ③ Over the four winter seasons,
a steady increase was seen in the number of participants in
both snowboarding and cross country skiing. ④ Compared to
the previous season, the number of participants in both alpine
skiing and freestyle skiing decreased in the 2007/2008 season.
⑤ The combined number of participants in snowboarding and
cross country skiing in the 2009/2010 season was smaller than
the number of participants in alpine skiing in the same season.
[39～40] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. Restoration assumes that one can recreate an artist’s
original intent and product. At best, restorers’ and museum
directors’ aesthetic preferences and historical theories drive
restorations, for it is impossible to step outside one’s historical
context. How can restorers be so sure that removing a layer
of lacquer isn’t merely their subconscious attempt to refashion
an artwork according to contemporary tastes? What’s
“restorative” about that? The “restored” Sistine Chapel may
look “authentic” today, but will it still look so when aesthetic
and historical theories have changed? Surely the best approach
with any great work of art is to simply leave it alone.
* lacquer: 래커(도료의 일종), 칠
① Do We Really Need Restoration?
② Aesthetics Matters in Restoration?
③ History of Successful Restoration
④ Restorers: A New Type of Artist
⑤ Sistine Chapel: Restored vs. Authentic
40. Your culture maintains an implicit “schedule” for the right
time to do many important things; for example, the right time
to start dating, to finish college, to buy your own home, or
to have a child. This unspoken timetable provides you with
a social clock, a schedule that tells you if you’re keeping
pace with your peers, are ahead of them, or are falling behind.
On the basis of this social clock, you evaluate your own social
and professional development. If you keep up with the rest
of your peers, then you’ll feel well adjusted, competent, and
a part of the group. If you’re late, you’ll probably experience
feelings of dissatisfaction. Although in some cultures the social
clock is becoming more flexible and more tolerant of deviations
from the conventional timetable, it still exerts pressure to keep
pace with your peers.
① Social Clock: An Unavoidable Pressure
② When Is the Right Time to Start Dating?
③ Time Management: A Matter of Concern for All
④ Flexibility and Tolerance of Today’s Social Clock
⑤ Why Is It Better to Keep Pace Than Fall Behind?
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
41. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Economic distance relates to the time and cost involved in
traveling from the origin to the destination area and back.
The higher the economic distance, the higher the resistance
for that destination and, consequently, the lower the demand.
① It follows, conversely, that between any origin and
destination point, if the travel time or travel cost can be
reduced, demand will increase. ② Many excellent examples
of this are available, such as the introduction of the jet plane
in 1959 and the introduction of the wide-bodied jets in the
late 1960s. ③ Jet planes first cut travel time between
California and Hawaii, for example, from twelve hours to
five hours, and demand grew dramatically. ④ A similar
surge in demand was experienced with the introduction of
the wide-bodied planes for transatlantic flights. ⑤ The
agricultural products picked up from Hawaiian farms in the
morning were on dinner tables in Californian homes by
evening. The introduction of these planes cut the travel cost
by almost 50 percent between the United States and most
countries on the European continent.
[42～43] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
42. A former resident of Canton, Ohio, was trying to
describe her image of the city to her classmates. She
found they had no image of this mid-sized city. She
described Canton as a city with major manufacturing
facilities and a downtown revitalization program.
(A) That fact suddenly crystallized the concept of Canton.
If Canton is destroyed, the nation might fall. That’s an
image that gave meaning and fullness to what it meant
to live in Canton.
(B) Her explanation moved the city from the position of no
image to that of a negative image. The class concluded
that Canton is a typical, boring, industrialized city.
(C) Then she suddenly recalled an experience: “I remember
hearing from a teacher that during World War II Canton
was a major U.S. target of the Germans.” Imagine, right
after the cities of Chicago, New York, and Los Angeles,
appears the name of Canton.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
43. Studying history is not about memorizing what we
have been told ― it requires us to investigate the
past. Like a detective, we start with the easy, known
pieces of information.
(A) You have to go further to ask questions such as, “Why
was he cruel?” and “What were the results of his rule?”
Hence, studying history trains us not to accept everything
we read or hear as the truth. Instead, it trains us to use our
critical thinking skills to get the full picture of the past.
(B) For example, if someone told you that Chinese Emperor
Qin Shihuang was a cruel ruler, would you simply accept
this as the truth? Or, would you ask questions about the
statement and look for information or evidence to support it?
(C) We then shuffle the pieces around to see how they fit
together. Once all the pieces fit, we have the full picture.
As we put the pieces together, we challenge ourselves
to think of other ways to describe what we know.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
While there are many places where this traditional view
of a scientist still holds true, labs aren’t the only place
where science is at work.
When you hear the word science, what’s the first thing that
comes to mind? It’s probably an image of a laboratory filled
with glassware and sophisticated equipment. ( ① ) The
person doing the science is wearing a white lab coat and
probably looks rather serious while engaged in some type of
experiment. ( ② ) Science can also be found at a construction
site, on a basketball court, and at a concert. ( ③ ) The truth
is that science is happening all around us. ( ④ ) It’s at work
in the kitchen when cooking meals, and we can even use it
when painting pictures. ( ⑤ ) Architects use science when
designing buildings, and science also explains why your
favorite baseball player can hit a home run.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many of us believe that amnesia, or sudden memory
loss, results in the inability to recall one’s name and
identity. This belief may reflect the way amnesia is
usually portrayed in movies, television, and literature. For
example, when we meet Matt Damon’s character in the
movie The Bourne Identity, we learn that he has no
memory for who he is, why he has the skills he does, or
where he is from. He spends much of the movie trying
to answer these questions. However, the inability to
remember your name and identity is exceedingly rare in
reality. Amnesia most often results from a brain injury
that leaves the victim unable to form new memories, but
with most memories of the past intact.
󰀻
While media often depict amnesia as a failure to (A)
past memories, especially one’s identity, most cases of
amnesia actually leave the sufferers unable to (B)
new memories with most memories of the past undamaged.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① integrate …… construct ② integrate …… rearrange
③ retrieve …… dismiss ④ retrieve …… construct
⑤ conceal …… rearrange
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8
8
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
[46～47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Our romantic mistakes can always be undone these days,
which you would think is a good thing. But the very
reversibility of our romantic commitments has only
worsened our problem because that also undermines our
satisfaction with our choices. To see this, you only need to
look at a study of a group of college students in a
photography class. The students made a print of their two
best photographs. They were then told that they could choose
one of the photos but that the other would be kept on file
as an example of their work. Then, the teacher added a twist.
One group was told that their choice was final. Whatever
they chose, they could not change their minds later. The other
group was told that they could switch photographs if they
changed their minds. In a survey taken later, students who
were allowed to change their mind liked their photos less
than the other students.
Why this paradoxical result? According to one researcher,
the brain has a kind of built-in defense system that works
to make us choices that cannot be undone.
Despite thinking that we would like the freedom to change
our minds, it appears that we are happier with our choices
if we think they can’t be changed, which means we would
be better off if we made romantic commitments more
permanent and more difficult to break, rather than less.
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Freedom of Choice: Everyone’s Unfulfilled Dream
② When Do We Need Permanent Relationships Most?
③ Happier When We Are Free to Change Our Minds?
④ Why Do People Regret Their Romantic Commitments?
⑤ A New Trend: Changing One’s Romantic Commitments
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① satisfied with ② spoiled by ③ unsure of
④ indifferent to ⑤ cautious of
[48～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Maureen Ferris was my best friend and I sometimes
visited her house after school. Her mother was stern and
meticulous about house cleaning. My mother, on the other
hand, did not care as much about a messy house. She had
sauce stains on her apron and sometimes allowed the
laundry to pile up. In the midst of her chores, my mother
spent time reading. This was her time away from endless
hours of child care and housework. Unironed school blouses
and a dirty kitchen might make (a) her feel guilty, but her
reading never did.
(B)
I carried over the love of reading to my workplace as
well. Off I’d go to work each day, passing on the gift of
reading to my students. I’d watch as they discovered they
could read and make sense of the letters and the words on
a page. All over the world there was agreement that this was
important, as important as eating or thinking or working.
And then one day, I finally understood what (b) she had
tried to show us, that reading was housework of the very
best kind.
(C)
One day, as I played in Maureen’s clean house, her mom
fixed me with (c) her cool gray eyes and said, “Your
mother’s nice, but she reads too much.” I was stunned. The
next time I caught my mother reading in her little patch of
sunlight, I studied (d) her in the doorway and decided her
apron could use a washing. Shame flushed through me.
Reading was the cause ― pleasure-reading in broad daylight.
Silently, I made vows that would keep me from sharing my
mother’s fate.
(D)
I tried my best not to follow in (e) her footsteps, but I
didn’t know that it was already too late for me. The way
I treasured my books revealed the extent of how much I
was already like my mother. The years passed in a blur of
covertly turned pages until I was a grown-up schoolteacher
with a husband and children of my own. I struggled
mightily with my own desire to open a novel in brazen
daylight. My only guiltless reading occurred at night, when
the dishes were rattling in the dishwasher and the kids
were in bed.
48. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (C) － (D) ② (B) － (D) － (C)
③ (C) － (B) － (D) ④ (C) － (D) － (B)
⑤ (D) － (B) － (C)
49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
50. 주어진 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 어머니의 앞치마에는 소스 얼룩이 묻어 있었다.
② 독서가 최고의 집안일이라는 것을 깨달았다.
③ 어머니에 대해 부끄러움을 느낀 적이 있었다.
④ 성장해서 학교 선생님이 되었다.
⑤ 죄책감 없이 독서할 수 있는 시간은 낮이었다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
1
8
2013학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 화분을 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① proud ② relaxed ③ angry
④ jealous ⑤ satisfied
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 이름이 첫인상에 미치는 영향
② 청중의 이름을 쉽게 기억하는 요령
③ 좋은 연설을 많이 들어야 하는 이유
④ 흥미 있는 연설 주제 선택의 중요성
⑤ 청중의 이름을 언급하는 효과적인 연설법
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 학교 콘서트 일정 조정하기
② 공공도서관 자원봉사 함께하기
③ 학교 축제 때 피아노 반주하기
④ 강사에게 레슨 가능 여부 알아보기
⑤ 피아노 연주 기법 동영상 찾아보기
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $ 27 ② $ 36 ③ $ 40 ④ $ 45 ⑤ $ 54
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 벼룩시장 판매자 등록을 홍보하려고
② 벼룩시장 개장 시간 변경을 공지하려고
③ 불우 이웃을 위한 성금 기부를 장려하려고
④ 중고품 재활용의 필요성을 강조하려고
⑤ 시내 관광 명소들을 소개하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to prepare dinner for him
② to buy a new washing machine
③ to drop the children off at school
④ to call the customer service center
⑤ to do the laundry at her parents’ house
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
① 약국 ② 실험실 ③ 보건실
④ 편의점 ⑤ 응급실
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 코치 - 운동선수 ② 구급 대원 - 응급 환자
③ 상담 교사 - 학부모 ④ 경기장 안내원 - 관람객
⑤ 운동 용품 판매원 - 고객
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 인터넷에서 정보 찾기 ② 여행 안내서 사러 가기
③ 호텔에 예약 확인하기 ④ 친구들에게 의견 묻기
⑤ 지역 정보 책자 발간하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 모델을
고르시오.
12. Lovely Cover에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① 시에서 가장 인기 있는 독서 클럽이다.
② 30개의 그룹으로 나눠진다.
③ 한 달에 두 번 회원 집에서 모인다.
④ 때때로 유명한 작가들을 토론에 초대한다.
⑤ 헌 책을 병원에 기부하는 행사를 개최한다.
제 3 교시
홀수형
①
②
③
④
⑤
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
2
8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Trust me. Your brother will love the hat.
② It’s important to keep yourself warm in Africa.
③ It’s not that difficult. I can teach you how to do it.
④ I hope I can travel to Africa to meet the child soon.
⑤ No problem. You’ll save money by joining the program.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Then, how about meeting up after class?
② Well, can you redesign my blog by next Friday?
③ No. You may ruin your project if you don’t do it.
④ Of course! You can rent the DVD from the library.
⑤ Exactly! Everyone should have an equal opportunity.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① So it is! Now I have enough time to finish it.
② That’s true! Good presentation skills are important.
③ That’s possible. I might be able to hand it in on Tuesday.
④ I agree. I need to get enough sleep to stay awake in class.
⑤ You can say that again! We should always do our best.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ms. Anderson이 Brian에게 할 말로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Ms. Anderson:
① It’ll take time to make a new friend.
② You’d better tell me what happened last week.
③ You did the right thing by telling him the truth.
④ Why don’t you go and tell him that you’re sorry?
⑤ Don’t you know a friend in need is a friend indeed?
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지
의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
As you are well aware, a great tragedy took place in
our city last week. Some faulty electrical wiring led to a
fire breaking out and eventually destroying an entire
block of homes in the suburbs. From the very beginning
it was fanned by strong winds, but it would not have
spread so far and so quickly, if our firefighters had been
able to arrive at the scene in time. Our city has only one
fire station located downtown. Would you please establish
a new fire station in our area, since you are mayor of
our city? We are in urgent need of one. I look forward
to your response.
① 소방서 신설을 건의하려고
② 강풍 대비 훈련을 통보하려고
③ 전기 시설의 교체를 촉구하려고
④ 소방 시설의 현대화를 제안하려고
⑤ 소방관의 조속한 파견을 요청하려고
19. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Ellen Langer learned from her mother how to prepare a
roast. As a little girl, ① she would watch as her mother
cut off a small bit from one end of the meat before
placing it in the roasting pan. As an adult, ② she followed
the same routine. However, a question occurred to ③ her
one day. Why did she have to cut off the end of the
roast? She asked her mother, who just said she’d learned
to do it from her own mother. Then Langer asked her
grandmother. She explained that when she was a young
mother, the only roasting pan ④ she’d had was too short
for a standard roast, so she had to cut off the end to fit
it into the pan. She’d long since gotten roasting pans in
larger sizes and hadn’t cut an end off since. Yet for
years both Langer and ⑤ her mother had mindlessly
followed this routine.
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
In many countries, amongst younger people, the habit of
reading newspapers has been on the decline and some of
the dollars previously (A) spent / were spent on newspaper
advertising have migrated to the Internet. Of course some
of this decline in newspaper reading has been due to the
fact that we are doing more of our newspaper reading
online. We can read the news of the day, or the latest on
business, entertainment or (B) however / whatever news on
the websites of the New York Times, the Guardian or almost
any other major newspaper in the world. Increasingly, we
can access these stories wirelessly by mobile devices as
well as our computers. Advertising dollars have simply
been (C) followed / following the migration trail across to
these new technologies.
(A) (B) (C)
① spent …… however …… followed
② spent …… whatever …… following
③ were spent …… however …… following
④ were spent …… whatever …… followed
⑤ were spent …… whatever …… following
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
We take it for granted that film directors are in the
game of recycling. Adapting novels ① is one of the most
respectable of movie projects, while a book that calls
itself the novelization of a film is considered barbarous.
Being a hybrid art as well as a late one, film has always
been in a dialogue with ② other narrative genres. Movies
were first seen as an exceptionally potent kind of illusionist
theatre, the rectangle of the screen corresponding to the
proscenium of a stage, ③ which appear actors. Starting in
the early silent period, plays were regularly “turned into”
films. But ④ filming plays did not encourage the evolution
of what truly was distinctive about a movie: the intervention
of the camera ― its mobility of vision. As a source of plot,
character, and dialogue, the novel seemed more ⑤ suitable.
Many early successes of cinema were adaptations of
popular novels.
* proscenium: 앞 무대
22. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I watched the beautiful stretch of the shoreline as it
floated into view. How wonderful it was! After two days
at sea, I finally saw the land of infinite opportunities.
There it was before me ― smiling and inviting; it was
difficult for anyone to decline that invitation. I was full
of great plans to find success in this unknown land. I
had accepted a job offer from Dr. Gilbert, who had
opened a medical clinic at an inland village last year. It
gave me great pleasure to think about how my dream
would become a reality. I looked again at the coast. The
line of distant mountains and shapes of houses were
gradually emerging through the mist. They welcomed me
with endless promises.
① excited and hopeful ② sad and depressed
③ relieved and sympathetic ④ scared and frightened
⑤ ashamed and embarrassed
[23~27] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
23. To say that we need to curb anger and our negative
thoughts and emotions does not mean that we should deny
our feelings. There is an important distinction to be made
between denial and restraint. The latter constitutes a
deliberate and voluntarily adopted discipline based on an
appreciation of the benefits of doing so. This is very
different from the case of someone who suppresses
emotions such as anger out of a feeling that they need to
present a facade of self-control, or out of fear of what
others may think. Such behaviour is like closing a wound
which is still infected. We are not talking about
rule-following. Where denial and suppression occur, there
comes the danger that in doing so the individual
anger and resentment. The trouble here is
that at some future point they may find they cannot
contain these feelings any longer.
* facade: 표면, 겉
① fades out ② copes with ③ stores up
④ soothes ⑤ overestimates
24. Have you ever heard anyone say of a dog, “Well, he’s
very successful and lives in a beautiful house, but he’s
not very happy”? One reason most dogs are much happier
than most people is that dogs aren’t affected by external
circumstances the way we are. I notice that even when it’s
pouring rain outside, my dogs, Blue and Celeste, are still
excited to go for a walk. As soon as I open the front door
to look outside, they’re beside me in a flash, standing
expectantly, ready for an adventure. I usually wait for a
break in the downpour, and then we all dash out together.
The fact that the ground is wet and there are mud
puddles dotting the landscape .
While I’m carefully picking my way around the wet
spots, the dogs are joyfully splashing right through them.
They aren’t afraid to get their paws dirty.
① motivates us to take a shorter walk
② stirs great excitement in me
③ puts the dogs in trouble
④ means nothing to the dogs
⑤ makes me want to wander around
25. In Belding’s ground squirrels, males leave home and
females mature in their natal area. This male-biased dispersal
creates an imbalance in the way males and females are
related to those individuals around them ― females find
themselves surrounded by relatives, while males are generally
in areas with complete strangers. This asymmetry translates
into females who warn close kin by emitting alarm calls,
while males generally do not emit calls since their dispersal
from their natal areas means their blood kin typically do
not benefit from such a warning. Further support for the
kinship-based alarm-calling hypothesis includes Sherman’s
finding that in the rare instances when females do move
away from their natal groups and into groups with far fewer
relatives, they .
① end up acquiring the alarm calls of the new group
② make constant attempts to bring their blood kin along
③ display a tendency to become more active and cooperative
④ emit alarm calls less frequently than do native females
⑤ adopt a more elaborate defense mechanism than alarm
calls
26. By likening the eye to a camera, elementary biology
textbooks help to produce a misleading impression of
what perception entails. Only in terms of the physics of
image formation do the eye and camera have anything in
common. Both eye and camera have a lens that focuses
light rays from the outside world into an image, and both
have a means of adjusting the focus and brightness of
that image. Both eye and camera have a light-sensitive
layer onto which the image is cast (the retina and film,
respectively). However, image formation is only the first
step towards seeing.
obscure the much more fundamental difference between
the two, which is that the camera merely records an
image, whereas the visual system interprets it. [3점]
① Apparent differences in the focusing power of a lens
② Superficial analogies between the eye and a camera
③ Contrasts in light adaptation between the retina and
film
④ Misunderstandings of image formation in the eye and
a camera
⑤ Close relationships between image formation and
interpretation
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
4
8
27. Recent evidence suggests that the common ancestor of
Neanderthals and modern people, living about 400,000
years ago, may have already been using pretty sophisticated
language. If language is based on genes and is the key to
cultural evolution, and Neanderthals had language, then
why did the Neanderthal toolkit show so little cultural
change? Moreover, genes would undoubtedly have changed
during the human revolution after 200,000 years ago, but
more in response to new habits than as causes of them. At
an earlier date, cooking selected mutations for smaller guts
and mouths, rather than vice versa. At a later date, milk
drinking selected for mutations for retaining lactose digestion
into adulthood in people of western European and East
African descent. .
The appeal to a genetic change driving evolution gets
gene-culture co-evolution backwards: it is a top-down
explanation for a bottom-up process. [3점]
① Genetic evolution is the mother of new habits
② Every gene is the architect of its own mutation
③ The cultural horse comes before the genetic cart
④ The linguistic shovel paves the way for a cultural road
⑤ When the cultural cat is away, the genetic mice will play
[28~29] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
28. To describe what happens to common resources as a
result of human greed, Garrett Hardin used the example
of an area of pasture on which all the cattle-owners are
permitted to graze their animals free of charge. Each
cattle-owner seeks to (A) his gain and in doing so
considers the relative advantage and disadvantage of
adding one more animal to the herd. The advantage is
that the cattle-owner receives the whole of the profit
from the sale of the additional animal. The disadvantage
is that the extra grazing contributes to the deterioration of
the pasture. However, the disadvantage is shared among
all the cattle-owners using the pasture, so the individual
owner suffers only a fraction of the disadvantage.
Consequently, the advantage is bound to (B) the
disadvantage. Thus, it is inevitable that more and more
animals will be brought onto the pasture until overgrazing
totally destroys the pasture.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① maximize …… equal ② distribute …… diminish
③ maximize …… exceed ④ distribute …… outweigh
⑤ maximize …… minimize
29. In physics, scientists invent models, or theories, to
describe and predict the data we observe about the
universe. Newton’s theory of gravity is one example;
Einstein’s theory of gravity is another. Those theories,
though they describe the same phenomenon, constitute
very different versions of reality. Newton, (A) ,
imagined that masses affect each other by exerting a
force, while in Einstein’s theory the effects occur through
a bending of space and time and there is no concept of
gravity as a force. Either theory could be employed to
describe, with great accuracy, the falling of an apple, but
Newton’s would be much easier to use. (B) , for
the calculations necessary for the satellite-based global
positioning system (GPS) that helps you navigate while
driving, Newton’s theory would give the wrong answer,
and so Einstein’s must be used.
(A) (B)
① for example …… On the other hand
② for example …… As a result
③ therefore …… As a result
④ moreover …… Likewise
⑤ moreover …… On the other hand
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Researchers have suggested that maintaining good social
relations depends on two ① complementary processes:
being sensitive to the needs of others and being motivated
to make amends or pay compensation when a violation
does occur. In short, maintaining good social relations
depends on the ② capacity for guilt. Martin L. Hoffman,
who has focused on the guilt that comes from harming
others, suggests that the motivational basis for this guilt
is empathetic distress. Empathetic distress occurs when
people ③ deny that their actions have caused harm or
pain to another person. Motivated by feelings of guilt,
they are ④ inclined to make amends for their actions.
Making amends serves to repair damaged social relations
and ⑤ restore group harmony.
31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Anxiety has a damaging effect on mental performance of
all kinds. It is in one sense a useful response gone awry ―
an overly zealous mental preparation for an anticipated threat.
But such mental rehearsal is (A) disastrous / constructive
cognitive static when it becomes trapped in a stale routine
that captures attention, intruding on all other attempts to focus
elsewhere. Anxiety undermines the intellect. In a complex,
intellectually demanding and high-pressure task such as that
of air traffic controllers, for example, having chronically
high anxiety is an almost sure predictor that a person
will eventually fail in training or in the field. The anxious
are more likely to fail even given (B) inferior / superior
scores on intelligence tests, as a study of 1,790 students in
training for air traffic control posts discovered. Anxiety
also sabotages academic performance of all kinds: 126
different studies of more than 36,000 people found that the
more (C) prone / resistant to anxieties a person is, the
poorer his or her academic performance is.
* go awry: 빗나가다
(A) (B) (C)
① disastrous …… inferior …… prone
② disastrous …… superior …… prone
③ disastrous …… superior …… resistant
④ constructive …… inferior …… resistant
⑤ constructive …… superior …… resistant
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
The above graph shows the total number of researchers
and the number of researchers per 1,000 people in the
EAP (economically active population) of Korea from 1997
to 2007. ① Compared to the previous year, both numbers
recorded each year showed an increase except for the
numbers recorded in 1998. ② The highest annual growth
in the number of researchers per 1,000 people in the EAP
was recorded between 2000 and 2001. ③ From 2004 to
2007 Korea had more than 200,000 researchers each year,
recording the largest number in 2007. ④ The number of
researchers per 1,000 people in the EAP in 2007 was
twice as large as that in 1999. ⑤ The annual increase in
the total number of researchers was the largest between
1998 and 1999.
33. Gregorio Dati에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Gregorio Dati was a successful merchant of Florence,
who entered into many profitable partnerships dealing in
wool, silk, and other merchandise. His career, however,
especially early on, knew the vicissitudes characteristic of
Renaissance business. For example, while he was en
route to Spain as his enterprise’s traveling partner, a role
typical for young men, pirates robbed him of all his
goods, including a consignment of pearls, and of his own
clothes. His recovery from such losses followed in part
from four successive marriages. Later in life, he was
honored to serve a number of posts in the city
government. Over the years he wrote a “diary,” actually
an occasional record in which he kept accounts of his
commercial and family life. Men of his kind pioneered
this form of writing about the public and private self.
* vicissitudes: 파란만장
** consignment: 위탁판매품
① Florence 상인으로서 성공하지 못했다.
② Spain으로 가는 길에 자신의 옷을 제외한 모든 것을 약탈
당했다.
③ 네 번의 잇따른 결혼으로 경제적 손실을 입었다.
④ 인생 후반에 시 정부에서 다수의 직책을 맡았다.
⑤ 자신의 가족생활을 매일 기록한 일기를 썼다.
34. Great Salt Lake에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
The Great Salt Lake is the largest salt lake in the
Western Hemisphere. The lake is fed by the Bear, Weber,
and Jordan rivers and has no outlet. At the close of the
Ice Age the entire region was submerged beneath a lake
of meltwater, and overflow from the lake flowed into the
Pacific Ocean through the Snake and Columbia rivers. The
great climatic change the lake underwent and continued
evaporation, exceeding the inflow of fresh water, reduced
the lake to one-twentieth of its former size. The majority
of salt in the Great Salt Lake is a remnant of dissolved
salts that are present in all fresh water. As the water
evaporated, the traces of dissolved salts were gradually
concentrated in the shrinking lake.
① 서반구에서 가장 큰 소금호수이다.
② Bear 강, Weber 강, Jordan 강에서 물이 유입된다.
③ 전 지역이 물에 잠긴 적이 있다.
④ 심한 기후 변화와 계속된 증발로 크기가 줄었다.
⑤ 대부분의 소금은 바닷물이 증발하여 남은 것이다.
[35~36] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
35. Although praise may encourage children to continue an
activity while an adult is watching, according to recent
studies, they are less likely to continue the activity when
the adult leaves or to repeat the activity in the future.
Rather than increasing children’s commitment to positive
behavior, praise encourages children to find ways to get
future verbal “goodies” from important adults. In other
words, praise is like the large pink icing rose in the center
of a cake. It is appealing and at first bite its sweetness
tastes wonderful. A couple more bites still might taste
good, but it quickly becomes overly sweet. It has only
one simple flavor; we soon tire of it and if we eat very
much at any one time, we might even feel slightly ill. It
may provide some quick energy but it provides no
nourishment and doesn’t support growth or health.
① 칭찬은 어린이에게 장기적으로는 효과가 없을 수 있다.
② 칭찬받는 어린이는 정신적으로 건강하게 성장한다.
③ 칭찬은 어린이의 바람직한 행동을 유발할 수 있다.
④ 어린이를 칭찬할 때는 달콤한 언어를 삼가야 한다.
⑤ 어린이를 칭찬하는 어른은 일관성을 유지해야 한다.
36. What’s dangerous about the Internet is, because it has
the aura of technology around it, it has a totally
undeserved instant credibility. The fact that information is
conveyed in this high-tech manner somehow adds
authority to what is conveyed, when in fact the Internet is
a global conveyer of unfiltered, unedited, untreated
information. It is the greatest tool we have not only for
making people smarter quicker, but also for making people
dumber faster. Rumors published on the Internet now have
a way of immediately becoming facts. This is particularly
true among people who might not themselves have access
to the Internet but hear a piece of news or gossip from
the people around them who do have access.
① 신속한 정보 보급을 위해 인터넷 접근성의 개선이 요구된다.
② 인터넷은 근거 없는 소문을 유포하여 사회 불안을 조장한다.
③ 인터넷은 다양한 정보를 빠르게 제공하는 훌륭한 도구이다.
④ 인터넷은 지적 능력의 향상과 저하를 동시에 가져온다.
⑤ 인터넷은 검증되지 않은 정보를 사실처럼 믿게 만든다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
6
8
[37~38] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
37. Why is it difficult to find a runner who competes
equally well in both 100-m and 10,000-m races? The
primary reason is that our muscles contain two main
types of muscle fibers, called slow and fast muscle fibers.
Slow muscle fibers are muscle cells that can sustain
repeated contractions but don’t generate a lot of quick
power for the body. They perform better in endurance
exercises, like long-distance running, which require slow,
steady muscle activity. Fast muscle fibers are cells that
can contract more quickly and powerfully than slow
muscle fibers but fatigue much more easily; they function
best for short bursts of intense activity, like weight lifting
or sprinting.
① reasons for runners to develop strong muscles
② differences between slow and fast muscle fibers
③ comparison of sprinting with long-distance running
④ necessity of building muscles for long-distance runners
⑤ relationship between muscle fibers and physical fatigue
38. Scientists should be careful to reduce bias in their
experiments. A bias occurs when what the scientist expects
changes how the results are viewed. This expectation might
cause a scientist to select a result from one trial over those
from other trials. Scientists can lessen bias by running as
many trials as possible and by keeping accurate notes of
each observation made. Valid experiments also must have
data that are measurable. This allows others to compare
the results to data they obtain from a similar experiment.
Most importantly, the experiment must be repeatable.
Findings are supportable when other scientists perform the
same experiment and get the same results.
① necessary conditions of repeatable experiments
② importance of identifying bias in scientific research
③ requirements for objective scientific experiments
④ guidelines for collecting measurable data in experiments
⑤ effective strategies for keeping accurate notes on data
[39~40] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. I once heard a woman say, “Of course, he’s successful.
It’s in his genes.” I knew she wasn’t talking about me,
because I was wearing shorts. I also knew she was wrong.
Success is not in our genes. Not all children of successful
people become successful themselves. Many kids have
everything going for them and end up total disasters. They
do none of the things that helped their parents succeed.
The number of unsuccessful people who come from
successful parents is proof that genes have nothing to do
with success. You can’t change your genes, but you can
change the people you imitate. The choice is up to you,
so why not imitate the best? There are hundreds of great
people to imitate and copy. They have terrific advice about
what helped them succeed. Jot down notes and carry
them around in your pants pocket. Then success will be
in your jeans, even if it’s not in your genes.
① Like Father, Like Son
② Want Success? Take a Recess!
③ The Myth of the Self-Made Man Is No More
④ Stick to Your Genes and Excel!
⑤ Follow the Best and Succeed!
40. In the early 1990s Norway introduced a carbon tax on
emissions from energy, and it did seem to encourage
environmental innovation. However, unexpected circumstances
came when they tried to apply this approach globally.
Agreeing on international taxes on emissions was
notoriously hard, as we already know that the European
Union has experienced terrible difficulties in trying to
regularize the complex and myriad differences in its
members’ sales taxes. Besides, although Sweden, Finland,
and Denmark barely decided to introduce carbon taxes
during the 1990s, they have not harmonized their
approaches with Norway or with each other. If such
similar countries can’t come to an agreement, there is
little hope for doing so with the vastly more diverse
countries in the rest of the world.
① Reduce Carbon Emission, Rescue Earth
② No Exit Out of Fatal Carbon Emissions
③ Global Carbon Tax: A Long Way to Go
④ Carbon Emissions: Not in My Backyard
⑤ Everlasting Conflict: Taxpayers vs. Collectors
41. 다음 글에서 전체의 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Apologies often fail. One reason apologies fail is that
the “offender” and the “victim” usually see the event
differently. Examining personal narratives, researchers
have found that those who cause harm tend to minimize
the offense ― probably to protect themselves from shame
and guilt. They also tend to downplay the consequences of
their actions. ① These tendencies can inflame the anger
of the hurt person, who, in contrast, may see an offense
as bigger than it really is. ② When sincere apologies are
offered in an ordinary human relationship, they are
readily accepted by the victims and reconciliations ensue.
③ Those who are hurt tend to see the act as one with
severe consequences and as part of an ongoing pattern
that is inexcusable and immoral. ④ Each person has his
or her own truth, and there is distortion on both sides.
⑤ Therefore, to apologize sincerely we must first listen
attentively to how the other person really feels about
what happened ― not simply assert what we think
happened.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
42. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
When you walk into a store, you are besieged by
information. Even purchases that seem simple can
quickly turn into a cognitive quagmire. Look at the jam
aisle.
(A) Rational models of decision-making suggest that the
way to find the best product is to take all of this
information into account and to carefully analyze the
different brands on display. But this method can
backfire.
(B) A glance at the shelves can inspire a whole range of
questions. Should you buy the smooth-textured
strawberry jam or the one with less sugar? Does the
more expensive jam taste better?
(C) When we spend too much time thinking in the
supermarket, we can trick ourselves into choosing the
wrong things for the wrong reasons. Making better
decisions when picking out jams or bottles of wine is
best done with the emotional brain, which generates its
verdict automatically.
* quagmire: 수렁, 진창
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
[43~44] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
43.
But now rock radio is in seemingly terminal decline and
MTV doesn’t show many music videos anymore.
Once upon a time, there was only one way to launch a
hit album: radio. Nothing else reached as many people, as
often. Getting on a radio playlist was difficult, but once
a song was in heavy rotation on the radio, it had a high
probability of selling. Then, in the 1980s, came MTV,
which became the second way to create a hit. ( ① ) It
had even more limited capacity for new music, but its
influence over a generation was unparalleled. ( ② ) For
the music labels, those were good times; it was a brutally
competitive business, but it was a business they knew.
( ③ ) They understood the rules, and they could earn
their keep by working them. ( ④ ) So how to market
music? ( ⑤ ) Labels know the answer lies online,
tapping the word-of-mouth forces that are replacing
traditional marketing in creating demand, but they’re still
trying to figure out exactly how best to do it.
* label: 음반사
44.
Despite such evidence of favoritism toward handsome
politicians, follow-up research demonstrated that voters
did not realize their bias.
Research has shown that we automatically assign to
good-looking individuals such favorable traits as talent,
kindness, honesty, and intelligence. ( ① ) Furthermore,
we make these judgements without being aware that
physical attractiveness plays a role in the process. ( ② )
Some consequences of this unconscious assumption that
“good-looking equals good” scare me. ( ③ ) For
example, a study of the 1974 Canadian federal elections
found that attractive candidates received more than two
and a half times as many votes as unattractive candidates.
( ④ ) In fact, 73 percent of Canadian voters surveyed
denied in the strongest possible terms that their votes had
been influenced by physical appearance; only 14 percent
even allowed for the possibility of such influence. ( ⑤ )
Voters can deny the impact of attractiveness on
electability all they want, but evidence has continued to
confirm its troubling presence.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
“Why, in country after country that mandated seat
belts, was it impossible to see the promised reduction in
road accident fatalities?” John Adams, professor of
geography at University College London, wrote in one
of his many essays on risk. “It appears that measures
that protect drivers from the consequences of bad
driving encourage bad driving. The principal effect of
seat belt legislation has been a shift in the burden of
risk from those already best protected in cars, to the
most vulnerable, pedestrians and cyclists, outside cars.”
Adams started to group these counterintuitive findings
under the concept of risk compensation, the idea that
humans have an inborn tolerance for risk. As safety
features are added to vehicles and roads, drivers feel
less vulnerable and tend to take more chances. The
phenomenon can be observed in all aspects of our daily
lives. Children who wear protective gear during their
games have a tendency to take more physical risks.
Hikers take more risks when they think a rescuer can
access them easily.
󰀻
According to John Adams, the phenomenon that safety
measures (A) careless driving may be accounted
for by the notion that a greater sense of security
(B) people to take more risks.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① contribute to …… tempts ② contribute to …… forbids
③ discourage …… tempts ④ discourage …… forces
⑤ discourage …… forbids
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
8
8
[46~47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
What should writers do when they’re teased by
intriguing but elusive ideas, by hints of thoughts that
seem too vague to be expressed in words? Edgar Allan
Poe’s advice is simple: They should pick up their pens
(or, he might add today, power up their laptops). Poe
dismisses the argument that any ideas are so deep or
subtle that they’re “ .”
“For my own part,” he said in an 1846 article in
Graham’s Magazine, “I have never had a thought which
I could not set down in words, with even more
distinctness than that with which I conceived it.” The
“mere act” of writing, Poe believed, helps writers make
their ideas not only clearer but more logical. To use his
phrase, the process of writing contributes to “the
logicalization of thought.”
Whenever he felt dissatisfied with a vague “conception
of the brain,” Poe said, “I resort forthwith to the pen,
for the purpose of obtaining, through its aid, the
necessary form, consequence and precision.”
Today’s advocates of freewriting would probably agree
with Poe on this point. Sometimes, the best way to
resolve a dilemma ― whether it’s a writing dilemma or
a thinking dilemma ― is simply to start writing.
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Begin at the End
② Think with Your Pen
③ Pleasure of Freewriting
④ Ideas Too Vague to Be Real
⑤ Make It Clear, Make It Logical
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① incapable of drawing attention
② in danger of being empty
③ against the writer’s will
④ beyond the compass of words
⑤ appreciated only by a privileged few
[48~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
On May 29th there was a heavy rain but the sun came
out the next day. Driving back from the village, I stopped
the car because a small woodchuck was traveling
along the road, its belly almost flat to the gravel. I got
out, took off my sweater, threw it over the woodchuck and
wrapped him in it, then put him on the floor of the car
while I drove home. I guessed the rain had washed out his
burrow. If I hadn’t come along (a) he would have eventually
died of starvation. Rescuing him, I felt as large as Fate.
* woodchuck: 마멋(다람쥣과의 짐승)
(B)
Very shortly the carton seemed too small. I offered
him a nest made of a covered box, bedded with straw
and with a round doorway cut in the front. He knew
instantly that a hole spells home, and (b) he dashed
inside. Every time I came to feed him, he jumped into
my lap as eagerly as ever. As the months passed, the
chuck grew bigger and bigger. My husband remarked
that if I didn’t do something soon, I would be chased
around for the rest of my days by a 15-pound
woodchuck begging for milk.
(C)
At home I put him in the bathtub and my husband
found a large carton. (c) He put cat litter in the bottom
and straw on top of that. When I put the chuck in, he
gratefully burrowed into the straw. I made a mixture of
milk and baby cereal for him. When I gave it to the
chuck, he ate it greedily. (d) He accepted me quickly. If
I put my hand in the carton, he nibbled my fingers. It
became clear that I was imprinting the woodchuck and
vice versa.
* imprint: 강하게 인상지우다
(D)
I decided to put him in a new burrow. I found a hole
along the wall of our orchard, put the chuck near it and
left him. I continued to visit him with his milk. Each
time (e) he greeted me joyfully, drank greedily, and tried
persistently to follow me back into the house. The
parting came unexpectedly. I went away on a brief trip.
When I came back, I saw no sign of him. In the spring
when I see a large, handsome woodchuck playing on
the grass, I will hope that it is he.
48. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
50. 주어진 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 운전 중 마멋을 발견하고 차를 세웠다.
② 스웨터를 벗어 마멋을 감쌌다.
③ 마멋에게 둥근 출입구가 있는 둥지를 마련해 주었다.
④ 우유와 유아용 시리얼의 혼합물을 만들었다.
⑤ 여행에서 돌아온 직후에 마멋을 다시 볼 수 있었다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.