1 8
번부터 번까지는 1 22 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 20
번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 들
려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① You didn’t look nervous at all.
② I’m sorry you missed the concert.
③ I’d like to go to the concert with you.
④ I got an urgent call from my company.
⑤ I didn’t know your concert was yesterday.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
①　I’m going to water the plants.
②　I’ll go get some empty boxes.
③　I’ll order soil for the planting.
④　Carrots and lettuce would be nice.
⑤ Children need to eat more vegetables.
3. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I tried to, but my cell phone was dead.　
② Why didn’t you take the subway instead?
③ That’s terrible. Are the passengers all safe?
④ Don’t worry. The next train will come soon.
⑤ I was lucky to catch the train at the last minute.
4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 역사 학습용 게임을 홍보하려고
② 강의의 개요와 목적을 설명하려고
③ 시험 준비 요령에 관해 조언하려고
④ 역사 유적 탐방 프로그램을 소개하려고
⑤ 온라인 게임의 역사 왜곡에 대해 항의하려고
5. 대화를 듣고, 교내 영어 대회에 대한 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
① 실시 분야를 늘려야 한다.
② 개최 시기를 늦춰야 한다.
③ 학년별로 나누어 실시해야 한다.
④ 심사 기준을 미리 공개해야 한다.
⑤ 학생을 심사 위원에 포함시켜야 한다.
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 대나무의 다양한 용도
② 판다의 수가 줄어드는 원인
③ 무분별한 삼림 개발의 위험성
④ 영화가 판다의 이미지에 미친 영향
⑤ 대나무 숲이 휴식 공간으로 인기 있는 이유
7. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 기숙사 생활 예절
② 기숙사 생활의 단점
③ 기숙사비 인하의 필요성
④ 통학 시간을 절약하는 방법
⑤ 가족과 함께 하는 식사의 중요성
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 팬-체조 선수 ② 영화감독-배우
③ 강습생-수영 강사 ④ 리포터-구조 요원
⑤ 사진 기자-수영 선수
9. 대화를 듣고, 포스터 디자인에서 남자가 수정할 부분을 고르
시오.
⑤
①
②
③
④
May 12, 2013
8 P.M.
Orange Theater
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 학생 상담 센터 소개해 주기
② 안전 교육 자료 제작해 주기
③ 초등학교 소방 훈련 도와주기
④ 일일 교사 프로그램 참가하기
⑤ 소방서 견학 안내 책자 보내 주기
2013학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어영역(B형) 1
제 3 교시
영어영역(B형)
2
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
2 8
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to make a dinner reservation
② to go out to get some food for her
③ to proofread the presentation slides
④ to attend the seminar on behalf of her
⑤ to scan the photos for the presentation
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 야구 경기를 보러 갈 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 미술 과제를 끝내지 못해서
② 가족사진을 찾으러 가야 해서
③ 비디오카메라를 빌리러 가야 해서
④ 할머니 생신잔치 준비를 해야 해서
⑤ 야구 경기 관람권을 구하지 못해서
13. 대화를 듣고, Greenworld Scholarship에 관해 두 사람이 언급
하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 대상 학년 ② 신청 기한
③ 성적 요건 ④ 제출 서류
⑤ 수여 금액
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $ 6 ② $ 9 ③ $ 10 ④ $ 19 ⑤ $ 21
15. Young Inventors’ Camp에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 4월 첫째 주에 개최된다.
② 팀별로 발명품을 제작한다.
③ 우승팀은 국제 발명가 회의에 참석할 수 있다.
④ 유명 발명가의 초청 강연이 있다.
⑤ 전년도 참가자에게는 참가 우선권이 주어진다.
16. winged bean에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오. [3점]
① 덥고 습한 나라에서 잘 자란다.
② 거의 모든 부분을 먹을 수 있다.
③ 꽃을 익히면 시금치 맛이 난다.
④ 뿌리의 박테리아가 토양을 비옥하게 한다.
⑤ 단백질과 비타민의 공급원이다.
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 로봇 청소기를
고르시오.
Robot Vacuum Cleaners
Model Warranty Battery Duration Price
① Lingo 1 year 1 hour $ 300
② Lobo 1 year 2 hours $ 350
③ Tango 2 years 1 hour $ 400
④ Wizard 2 years 2 hours $ 450
⑤ Sweeper 3 years 2 hours $ 500
18. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① That’s good. I’d like to come at 5 p.m.
② I see. What time is he going to come back?
③ Is he? How about taking him to the dentist?
④ The dentist will see you now. You can go in.
⑤ Right. I should have brushed my teeth regularly.
19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I’m sorry. I failed the interview yesterday.
② I know. I learned a lot from the internship.
③ I didn’t get information about the internship.
④ Thanks for encouraging me. I’ll try my best.
⑤ I always wanted to join the school drama club.
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Emily가 점원에게 할 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
Emily:
① I already have a similar style.
② I’m looking for a dress like this.
③ I came to pick up the dress I ordered.
④ Will you come to the party next Saturday?
⑤ Can you show me another fashion magazine?
[21 ~ 22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① types of skintoskin
contact
② ways to raise a healthy baby
③ tips on how to breastfeed effectively
④ importance of early childhood education
⑤ influence of environment on intelligence
22. kangaroo care의 효과로 언급되지 않은 것은? [3점]
① 체중 증가 ② 숙면 유도
③ 체온 유지 ④ 면역 체계 강화
⑤ 심장 박동 안정
이제 듣기·말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는
문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
영어영역(B형)
3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
3 8
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
What would happen if you went to the soil and said, “Give
me some fruit. Give me some plants”? The soil would
probably respond, “Excuse me, sir, but you’re a little
confused. You must be new here. That’s not the way the
game is played.” Then it would explain that you should plant
the seed. You take care of it. You water it and cultivate the
soil. You fertilize it. You protect it and nurture it. Then, if
you do it well, you will get your plant or your fruit
sometime later. You could ask from the soil forever, but it
wouldn’t change things. You have to keep giving, keep
nurturing, for the soil to bear fruit ― and life is exactly the
same way.
① 분수에 맞게 처신하라.
② 행동하기 전에 상황을 고려하라.
③ 효율적인 작업 방식을 계속 모색하라.
④ 서로에게 도움이 되는 방법을 찾으라.
⑤ 원하는 것을 얻으려면 먼저 노력을 기울이라.
24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we furnish our rooms or fill our closets, we say “I
want that,” but we also tell manufacturers “make more of
that” ― setting in motion a whole process of extraction,
production, distribution, marketing, and sales. In the process,
we tell each other that this level of consumption is normal,
natural, and good. Each of our decisions, therefore, is a case
study in ethics, a determination about the nature of “the
good life.” As we peruse the stuff available to us, we’re
making judgements about which goods are good for us and
why. We don’t think we’re engaged in ethical reflection, but
we are deciding what we value, and how we will embody
our values in the material world. Our rooms and our
belongings send messages about identity and community, but
they also express our ethical sensibilities, whether we like it
or not.
① Where we live decides what we consume.
② What we buy reflects what we value in life.
③ Old things carry the memories of their owners.
④ Ethics rarely has an impact on consumer behavior.
⑤ Excessive spending goes against our ethical values.
25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
After witnessing an event, we are sometimes exposed to
new information that can actually change our memory. What
is known as the “postevent
information effect” often results
from our dialogues with other people. For example, an
eyewitness to some event frequently discusses with others
what they saw. In the aftermath of some event, the
eyewitness and others may speculate as to exactly what
happened, the sequence in which it occurred, and the degree
to which various participants were involved. Rather than
facilitating reproductive memory ― the accurate reproduction
of some past event, an eyewitness’ dialogues with other
people create reconstructive memory ― a reconstruction of
the past which may be quite inaccurate because it responds
more to considerations of plausibility than fact. Therefore,
people can reconstruct inaccurate memories after witnessing
some event as a result of discussing that event with other
people.
* plausibility: 그럴듯함, 있음직함
① How Distortion of Memory Can Occur
② Why We Need to Reconstruct Our Memory
③ Relationship Between Intelligence and Memory
④ Reproductive Memory: A Source of Inspiration
⑤ Dialogue: An Integral Part of Accurate Memory
26. 밑줄 친 he[him]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
John Boyle O’Reilly, poet, was one day walking along
Boylston street in Boston. A stranger who was approaching
① him from behind mistook him for a friend whom he had
not seen for a long time. He slapped O’Reilly on the
shoulder and greeted ② him heartily. Many men in O’Reilly’s
place would have been annoyed and shown it, but not so the
poet. Turning about, ③ he stretched out his hand. “I am not
Jack,” said ④ he, “but I am glad to shake hands with any
man who is as glad to see an old friend as you seem to
be.” This handsome speech was a great relief to the
stranger, who had been much embarrassed upon seeing an
unknown face turned toward ⑤ him.
영어영역(B형)
4
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
4 8
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
The ‘Merton Rule’ was devised in 2003 by Adrian Hewitt, a
local planning officer in Merton, southwest London. The rule,
which Hewitt created with a couple of colleagues and
persuaded the borough council to pass, ①was that any
development beyond a small scale would have to include the
capacity to generate ten percent of that building’s energy
requirements, or the developers would be denied permission
②to build. The rule sounded sensible and quickly caught on,
with over a hundred other local councils ③followed it within
a few years. In London, the mayor at the time, Ken
Livingstone, introduced ‘Merton Plus,’ which raised the bar to
twenty percent. The national government then introduced the
rule more ④widely. Adrian Hewitt became a celebrity in the
small world of local council planning, and Merton council
started winning awards for ⑤its environmental leadership.
*raise the bar: 기준을 높이다
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Sometimes athletes need to be allowed to practice their
skills on their own before they receive feedback. That way
they can determine what is working and what isn’t and can
become more ①mindful of their strengths and weaknesses. If
you attempt to provide assistance when athletes would prefer
to practice on their own, you may be ②wasting a lot of time
and breath. When athletes realize that their best efforts are
producing ③satisfactory outcomes, they are usually more
motivated to hear what you have to say. In other words,
athletes are responsive to assistance when they fail to achieve
the outcome they were hoping for. A coach’s challenge, then,
is to remain patient until these and other types of ④teachable
moments arise. The reward for such ⑤patience is athletes
who are motivated to hear what you have to say and eager to
incorporate your suggestions.
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows six Olympians who won the most
medals in the Summer Olympic Games. ①Michael Phelps of
the USA is now the most decorated Olympian of all time
with a total of 20 medals including 16 gold medals. ②Larisa
Latynina of the USSR takes up the second place winning just
two medals fewer than Phelps, but in terms of gold medals
she is seven medals behind him. ③After Latynina comes
Nikolay Andrianov of the USSR with a total of 15 medals,
two golds and one bronze fewer than Latynina. ④ Boris
Shakhlin of the USSR, Edoardo Mangiarotti of Italy and
Takashi Ono of Japan won the same number of medals, 13
medals each. ⑤In terms of gold medals, however, Shakhlin
won more than Mangiarotti or Ono, and he even won more
than Andrianov, who won seven gold medals.
30. MacDowell Colony에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
The MacDowell Colony is an artists’ colony, located in
Peterborough, New Hampshire, USA. The colony is designed
to facilitate a balance between social interaction and focus
on work. Private studios are available to artists 24 hours a
day, along with the dining and recreation rooms at Colony
Hall. To ensure all colonists’ autonomy and privacy, no one
may visit a studio without invitation. Breakfast and dinner
are served in the dining room; lunch is delivered to each
studio. After dinner, occasional presentations are a traditional,
elective part of the stimulating and supportive environment.
Friendships established among artists in residence often lead
to collaborations and connections beyond the colony. The
maximum length of residence is two months; the average
stay is five to six weeks.
① 개인 스튜디오가 하루 24시간 이용 가능하다.
② 초대가 없으면 스튜디오를 방문할 수 없다.
③ 점심 식사가 각 스튜디오로 배달된다.
④ 저녁 식사 후에 이따금씩 발표회가 열린다.
⑤ 평균 거주 기간이 2개월이다.
영어영역(B형)
5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
5 8
[31 ~ 36] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. When we are children, our bodies grow automatically. A
year goes by, and we become taller, stronger, more capable
of doing new things and facing new challenges. I think many
people carry into adulthood a subconscious belief that
mental, spiritual, and emotional growth follows a similar
pattern. Time goes by, and we simply get better. We’re like
Charlie Brown in Charles Schulz’s Peanuts comic strip, who
once said, “I think I’ve discovered the secret of life ― you
just hang around until you get used to it.” The problem is
that we don’t improve by simply living. We have to be
about it. Musician Bruce Springsteen commented,
“A time comes when you need to stop waiting for the man
you want to become and start being the man you want to
be.” No one improves by accident. Personal growth doesn’t
just happen on its own.
① content ② defensive ③ intentional
④ thankful ⑤ selfconfident
32. Table manners help us to see that politeness is not, after
all, a disadvantage. Although the illmannered
person can
grab more of the food, he will receive less of the affection;
and fellowship is the real meaning of the meal. Next time,
he will not be invited. Politeness makes you a part of things
and so gives you an enduring edge over those who never
acquired it. And this gives us a clue to the real nature of
rudeness: to be rude is not just to be selfish, in the way
that children (until taught otherwise) and animals are
instinctively selfish; it is to be . Even in the
friendliest gathering, the rude person will reveal, by some
word or gesture, that he is not really part of it. Of course
he is there, a living organism, with wants and needs. But he
does not belong in the conversation. [3점]
① clever ② alone ③ talkative
④ impatient ⑤ curious
33. Can you recall what you bought for your dinner on the
same day last month? Probably not. How about this then:
herdsmen of the Swazi tribe of East Africa are able to
remember in great detail each cow or bull bought a year
ago, including who sold the animal, whether it was a bull, a
cow, or a calf, its age and appearance, and what it was
bartered for. Impressive, huh? Cattle have tremendous social
and economic importance in the Swazi tribe. When the
psychologist Barlett tested these same men on other kinds
of detail, their memory wasn’t better than the average
person’s. The conclusion we can draw from this is that we
tend to to us.
* barter: 물물교환하다
① follow others’ opinions
② stick to what we believe
③ expect our future positively
④ learn better by imitating others
⑤ remember what matters most to us
34. Aristotle learned a lesson in wisdom in fourthcentury
B.C.
Athens, watching the carpenters, shoemakers, blacksmiths,
and boat pilots. Their work was not governed by
systematically applying rules or following rigid procedures.
The materials they worked with were too irregular, and each
task posed new problems. Aristotle thought the choices
craftsmen made in acting on the material world provided
clues to the kind of knowhow
citizens needed to make
moral choices in the social world. Aristotle was particularly
fascinated with how the masons on the Isle of Lesbos used
rulers. A normal, straightedged
ruler was of little use to
the masons who were carving round columns from slabs of
stone and needed to measure the circumference of the
columns. Unless you bent the ruler. Which is exactly what
the masons did. They fashioned a flexible ruler out of lead,
a forerunner of today’s tape measure. For Aristotle, knowing
was exactly what practical wisdom was all
about. [3점]
* circumference: 원의 둘레
① how to bend the rule to fit the circumstance
② what to do to relieve stress from work
③ when to stop and when to begin
④ where to apply rigid procedures
⑤ whom to help with one’s skills
영어영역(B형)
6
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
6 8
35. In one experiment researchers had people sit at computers
and review two online articles describing opposing theories
of learning. One article laid out an argument that “knowledge
is objective”; the other made the case that “knowledge is
relative.” Each article was set up in the same way, with
similar headings, and each had links to the other article,
allowing a reader to jump quickly between the two to
compare the theories. The researchers hypothesized that
people who used the links would gain a richer understanding
of the two theories and their differences than would people
who read the pages sequentially, completing one before
going on to the other. They were wrong. The test subjects
who read the pages linearly actually scored considerably
higher on a subsequent comprehension test than those who
clicked back and forth between the pages. ,
the researchers concluded.
① The links helped to organize information
② Using the links got in the way of learning
③ Attitude is more important than knowledge
④ The more links, the higher level of popularity
⑤ The Web motivates people to read more articles
36. For a huntergatherer
ancestor, it would have been useful
to make plans and be able to follow through with them. It
might be very advantageous to carefully and deliberately
develop skills in toolmaking,
a development whose payoff
might be years away, rather than just try to use whatever
can be grabbed when a tool is needed. However, much of
huntergatherer
life is unplannable because of events. It
would really not be a good response, observing a passing
herd of wildebeest, to say, “Actually, Wednesday is my
honeygathering
day.” Life for a huntergatherer
would be a
series of urgent improvisations on the stimuli occurring right
now, be they passing prey, the lack of passing prey, attacks
by others, changes in the makeup
of the group, or countless
other possibilities. People would do well who could
and quickly mobilize an energetic,
spontaneous, physical response to whatever happened to turn
up. [3점]
① decide to work independently
② choose wise leaders to guide them
③ abandon plans at the moment’s notice
④ follow the footsteps of their ancestors
⑤ make a lot of friends in their line of work
37. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
When scientists created a hunk of mass called the
international prototype kilogram(IPK), and distributed about
40 of these prototype kilograms to other countries, they
realized contaminants could coat the kilogram’s surface. To
try to counteract this effect, they made the masses into
cylinders, which have less surface area to acquire dust and
debris. (A) , the fundamental unit of mass has gained
tens of micrograms of mass from surface contamination. A
skilled technician will rub the cylinders with alcohol, but
because every country cleans their kilograms differently and
at different times, each kilogram in the world is off by a
different, unknown amount. (B) , each country that
has one of these standard masses has a slightly different
definition of the kilogram, which could throw off science
experiments that require very precise weight measurements
or international trade in items that are highly restricted by
weight. * IPK: 국제 킬로그램 표준기
(A) (B)
① In addition For example
② In addition On the contrary
③ Nevertheless As a result
④ Nevertheless Likewise
⑤ In other words Furthermore
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Wise leaders don’t just encourage followers to reveal
bad news. They dig for evidence that clashes with their
presumptions.
(A) They also believed he was strongly prounion
and
resisted providing information that could help supervisors
run the plant during a strike. These assumptions were
dashed when a foreman asked the mechanic why he
wasn’t writing things down.
(B) His answer was simple: He felt he had lousy penmanship
and was ashamed to have his writing on display. Snare
concludes, “Walk around, look, ask questions. Asking
questions is the best source of information, yet it is the
least used.”
(C) Veteran project manager Paul Snare tells how, in a big
diaper plant in Michigan, supervisors believed their best
mechanic wasn’t documenting his work because he wanted
to maintain an information edge over coworkers.
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
영어영역(B형)
7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
7 8
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
Instead, it indicates that a very specific question served
as a negative stimulus and really bothered the person.
I look for lip compression or disappearing lips during
interviews or when someone is making a declarative
statement. ( ① ) This is such a reliable cue that it will
show up precisely at the moment a difficult question is
asked. ( ② ) If you see it, that doesn’t necessarily mean the
person is lying. ( ③ ) For example, if I ask someone, “Are
you hiding something from me?” and he compresses his lips
as I ask the question, he is hiding something. ( ④ ) This is
especially accurate if it is the only time he has concealed or
compressed his lips during our discussion. ( ⑤ ) It is a
signal that I need to push further in questioning this person.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
In one experiment, 49 college students were asked to
sit at a cluttered cubicle, a tidy cubicle, or one that was
inbetween.
After sitting at the desk, the volunteers
were asked to rate on a scale of one to nine how well a
series of statements fit them: “It upsets me to go into
complicated situations,” “I would like to simplify my life
as much as I can,” “I would like to keep things simple,”
and “I am bothered by complicated things.” Next the
volunteers were given a test in which they needed to
sort 33 products into groups — the volunteers had to
come up with an organizing principle themselves. When
the results were in, it was clear that people sitting at
messy desks came up with much simpler organizing
principles. They were also the ones who scored high on
questions like, “I would like to simplify my life as much
as I can.”
􋾞
The experiment above showed that the (A) of
the place where people were increased their need for
(B) .
(A) (B)
① messiness simplicity
② messiness security
③ decoration attention
④ decoration perfection
⑤ temperature relaxation
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Location of events is key to newsworthiness. The
nearer something happens to your readers, the more
they should care about it. For example, the news may
be that a school in your state has adopted a new
attendance policy that allows seniors to call themselves
in sick at the attendance office. That’s newsworthy. It’s
interesting. Right? Now imagine that same event
happened, not just in your state, but in your own school.
Which story is more newsworthy? Which would more
readers care to read?
But again, that’s not to say that news that happens
only in your own backyard should make it to print. No,
what good journalists need to do is news
events. Even if they happen miles away, most (if not
all) stories can be made more proximal. You just have to
ask the right questions, questions that, inevitably, your
readers should ask.
Let’s say the story is that a high school golfer in a
state other than your own has been kicked off the team
for using illegal clubs. Just ask the right questions.
Could this happen at your own school? Why? Why not?
What are the rules governing club use in golf? What are
the rules to prevent cheating in other sports? Do some
students get around those rules? How? See what I
mean? Even events that don’t happen next door have
meaning. It’s up to you to provide that “closeness,” that
proximity, to your readers.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① Accuracy: The Power of News Stories
② Bad News Travels Faster than Good News
③ The Closer to the Reader, the More Newsworthy
④ Sports News: The Most Popular News Category
⑤ Popularity Is Not a Goal in News Reporting
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① localize ② update ③ summarize
④ distribute ⑤ collect
영어영역(B형)
8
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
8 8
[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Recently, Sylvia Sebring had a series of dreams in
which she saw a light gray mare standing in a corral.
The horse had a severe limp, and, what was most
unsettling, the mare was telepathically asking her for
help. Witnessing the plight of an injured horse was
certainly not an unusual experience for Sylvia Sebring.
(a) She is a vet and deals daily with suffering animals.
But to dream repeatedly of an injured horse that was
unknown to her was a unique occurrence for her. What
did the horse want her to do? * corral: 가축우리
(B)
When Sylvia Sebring visited the corral at the Marana
Stockyards and saw the Arabian mare, (b) she knew
immediately that the horse was the same light gray mare
that she had seen in her dreams. Ms. Sebring knew that
she had received the horse’s cry for help, and she was
there to answer that desperate entreaty. At last, the
outcry from an abandoned and injured horse had been
answered. (c) She was now the proud owner of the
Arabian mare and called her Dream Walker.
* entreaty: 간청
(C)
Ms. Sebring felt an eerie shock of recognition as she
read about the mare found in the desert. The horse in
the desert seemed to perfectly fit the horse in her
dreams. Could it be that the horse had been sending her
desperate messages in her dreams that (d) she needed
to come and rescue it? Prompted to do some
investigation regarding the condition and present location
of the rescued horse, Ms. Sebring learned that the
animal was due to be auctioned at the Marana
Stockyards soon.
(D)
One day a local newspaper carried a story about a
rescued horse that had been abandoned to die by drug
smugglers in the desert. A US Customs Service aircraft
had sighted the mare lying nearly dead. The horse had
lain in the terrible heat of the desert with no water for
at least a week. The newspaper story described the
horse as a white Arabian mare, and stated that (e) she
had a twelveinch
cut on one of her legs.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위　글의 Sylvia Sebring에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 부상당한 말이 나오는 꿈을 여러 번 꾸었다.
② 구조된 말을 Marana Stockyards에서 보았다.
③ Dream Walker의 주인이 되었다.
④ 부상당한 말을 구조하기 위해 사막에 갔다.
⑤ 구조된 말이 경매될 것임을 알게 되었다.
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.

1
8
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지 1
1번부터 22번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, I don’t have a computer.
② Right, I’ll call you when I’m done.
③ Yeah, I saved it in my cell phone.
④ Yes, I’ll buy you a new cell phone.
⑤ Sorry, you’ve got the wrong number.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It’s true. She’ll start reading sooner or later.
② I’ll ask her teacher to choose her next time.
③ Right. She must go to a new school.
④ Sorry to hear that. Better luck next time.
⑤ Great. She must have worked on reading a lot.
3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, I’m not sure where you’re going.
② You’re welcome. I’m happy to watch him.
③ Don’t worry. I’ll come over around 10 a.m.
④ Never mind. I’ll make him dinner tomorrow.
⑤ Okay. I’ll let him play but only for an hour.
4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 제철 과일 소비를 권장하려고
② 과일 보관 용기를 광고하려고
③ 얼룩 제거 용품을 홍보하려고
④ 과일 껍질 활용법을 소개하려고
⑤ 과일 껍질의 영양소를 설명하려고
5. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 뇌우 발생 시 대처 요령
② 뇌우의 다양한 발생 원인
③ 지구의 급격한 기후 변화
④ 날씨와 심리 변화의 상관관계
⑤ 날씨가 야외 활동에 미치는 영향
6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 양초를 만드는 절차
② 등산 시 유의할 사항
③ 적절한 휴식의 필요성
④ 취미 생활을 하는 이유
⑤ 스트레스의 다양한 요인
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아이와 함께 텃밭을 가꾸면 아이가 채소를 잘 먹게 된다.
② 텃밭에서 채소를 직접 기르면 가족 경제에 도움이 된다.
③ 가족의 건강을 위해 유기농 채소를 구입할 필요가 있다.
④ 지역 농산물을 구입하면 경제 활성화에 기여할 수 있다.
⑤ 채소 위주의 식습관은 아이의 두뇌 발달을 촉진한다.
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 상담 교사 － 학생
② 여행사 직원 － 여행객
③ 수의사 － 애완동물 주인
④ 동물원 사육사 － 관람객
⑤ 국립공원 직원 － 탐방객
9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 마중 나가기 ② 쿠키 사다 주기
③ 도시락 주문하기 ④ 교통사고 신고하기
⑤ 사무실에 데려다 주기
제 3 교시
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 영어 영역(B 형)
2
8
11. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to rent a laptop ② to visit a museum
③ to surf the Internet ④ to find some photos
⑤ to review the report
12. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 배낭여행을 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 할아버지 댁에서 지내야 해서
② 친구와 만날 약속이 있어서
③ 부모님이 허락하지 않아서
④ 방학 숙제를 해야 해서
⑤ 제주도에 가야 해서
13. 대화를 듣고, 선거 포스터에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 후보 기호 ② 후보 사진
③ 학교 로고 ④ 학교 사진
⑤ 선거 슬로건
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $215 ② $225 ③ $240 ④ $250 ⑤ $270
15. 장학금에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① 선정 과정은 두 단계로 구성된다.
② 면접관은 학생들이 추천한 교사들이다.
③ 개인별로 학기당 $1,000가 지급된다.
④ 신청 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
⑤ 3명의 수혜자는 다음 달에 발표될 것이다.
16. four-eyed fish에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오. [3점]
① 각각의 눈이 두 부분으로 나누어져 있다.
② 수면 아래위를 동시에 볼 수 있다.
③ 남아메리카에서 주로 발견된다.
④ 작은 물고기를 잡아먹기도 한다.
⑤ 작은 어항에서 키우기에 적합하다.
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 선택한 복사기 모델을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
18. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① You must have enjoyed the party a lot.
② It’s nice of you to take care of my baby.
③ I’m so excited that your baby can walk now.
④ I can’t wait to see what your baby will choose.
⑤ Thank you for inviting me to your graduation party.
19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Maybe your luck has run out.
② Your wish has finally become a reality.
③ You’d better apply for the music program.
④ If you keep it up, you might get tickets.
⑤ I’m so surprised that you were on TV.
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Julia가 Samuel에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Julia: Samuel,
① could you give me a ride home?
② would you teach me how to park?
③ when did you get your driver’s license?
④ what happened after you parked your car?
⑤ how many times did you take the road test?
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① developmental stages of human history
② the characteristics of scientific inventions
③ the difference between speaking and writing
④ the significance of writing in human history
⑤ ways to promote invention in the modern world
22. 인류의 발명품으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 전구 ② 비행기
③ 전화기 ④ 현미경
⑤ 망원경
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
영어 영역(B 형) 3
3
8
23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Everyone would like to assume that their wonderful,
creative ideas will sell themselves. But as Galileo, Edvard
Munch, Toni Morrison, Sylvia Plath, and millions of others
have discovered, they do not. On the contrary, creative ideas
are usually viewed with suspicion and distrust. Thus, students
need to learn how to persuade other people of the value of
their ideas. This selling is part of the practical aspect of
creative thinking. If students do a science project, it is a good
idea for them to present it and demonstrate why it makes an
important contribution. If they develop a plan for a new form
of government, they should explain why it is better than the
existing form of government.
① 공정한 판단은 타인의 의견을 경청하는 데서 시작된다.
② 창의적 사고는 문제점을 분석하는 것으로부터 출발한다.
③ 과학 프로젝트는 학생들의 창의적 사고 형성에 도움이 된다.
④ 학생들은 창의적 생각을 남에게 납득시키는 방법을 배워야 한다.
⑤ 학생들은 창의적 사고의 가치를 실용적 측면에서 분석해야 한다.
24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
In the nineteenth century, a decisive moment occurred when
people in advertising and journalism discovered that if they
framed their stories and appeals with fear, they could capture
our attention. It is an emotion we find hard to resist or control,
and so they constantly shifted our focus to new possible
sources of anxiety: the latest health scare, the new crime
wave, and endless hazards in the environment of which we
were not aware. With the increasing sophistication of the
media and the haunting quality of the imagery, they have been
able to give us the feeling that we are fragile creatures in an
environment full of danger ― even though we live in a world
infinitely safer and more predictable than anything our
ancestors knew. With their help, our anxieties have only
increased.
① the crisis of modern journalism
② the various sources of human fears
③ the media’s exploitation of human anxieties
④ the importance of advertising and journalism
⑤ the fragile nature of human life in modern society
25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
In the past, many public-sector recreation providers allowed
people free access or charged for permits to control the
amount or season for different recreational activities such as
fishing or horse-riding. However, governments and other
public agencies are finding that funding to maintain sites and
facilities, to cope with increased demand on the landscape, is
becoming difficult to maintain. Opportunities to charge
visitors for appropriate services to help compensate for these
costs are being considered as one solution. This is a sensitive
matter, as free access for all people to the outdoors is a much
cherished right. There is also an additional dilemma for public
agencies where recreation facilities are already provided from
public money, and it could be argued that the taxpayer is
being charged twice. Thus, care is needed by public bodies to
ensure that charges are only made for services that are clearly
additional to the provision of free access.
① How to Use Public Facilities for Outdoor Activities
② Public Recreation Services: To Charge or Not?
③ Access to Public Facilities: Denied or Delayed?
④ A Short History of Public Recreation Facilities
⑤ Preserving the Landscape: Torn Between Two Demands
26. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Zaynab Fawwaz was born into a poor family in South
Lebanon. As a young girl ① she went to Alexandria with the
Egyptian family for whom she worked. Her mistress was
intrigued by her maid’s native intelligence and introduced
Zaynab to ② her literate friend, Fatima. She, in turn, taught
her reading, writing and arithmetic. Zaynab quickly learned
what ③ her teacher had to offer and in time went on to study
with Egyptian scholars. Eventually, ④ she became very active
in women’s issues and she wrote some pioneering poetry and
essays focused on women’s rights. The most famous of ⑤ her
essays was The Zaynab Letters.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 영어 영역(B 형)
4
8
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Given that music appears to enhance physical and
mental skills, are there circumstances where music is
① damaging to performance? One domain ② which this is of
considerable significance is music’s potentially damaging
effects on the ability to drive safely. Evidence suggests an
association between loud, fast music and reckless driving, but
how might music’s ability to influence driving in this way
③ be explained? One possibility is that drivers adjust to
temporal regularities in music, and ④ that their speed is
influenced accordingly. In other words, just as faster music
causes people to eat faster, ⑤ so it causes people to drive at
faster speeds, as they engage mentally and physically with
ongoing repeated structures in the music.
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
England’s plan to establish colonies in North America,
starting in the late sixteenth century, was founded on a
(A) false / valid idea. It was generally assumed that Virginia,
the region of the North American continent to which
England laid claim, would have the same climate as the
Mediterranean region of Europe, since it lay at similar
latitudes. As a result, the English hoped that the American
colonies, once established, would be able to supply
Mediterranean goods such as olives and fruit and reduce England’s
(B) dependence / restriction on imports from continental Europe.
One prospectus claimed that the colonies would provide “the
wines, fruit and salt of France and Spain ... the silks of Persia
and Italy.” Similarly, (C) abundant / scarce timber would do
away with the need to import wood from Scandinavia. In
short, America was mistakenly expected to be a land of plenty
that would quickly turn a profit.
* latitude: 위도 ** prospectus: 사업 설명서, 투자 설명서
(A) (B) (C)
① false …… dependence …… abundant
② false …… dependence …… scarce
③ false …… restriction …… abundant
④ valid …… restriction …… scarce
⑤ valid …… restriction …… abundant
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the comparison between the
allocated budget and actual spending for six departments at
Triton Ventures in 2012. ① The Customer Service department
was allocated 60,000 dollars, which was greater than the
amount allocated to any other department. ② On the other
hand, in terms of actual spending, the top two departments
that spent the most were Marketing and Development. ③ The
Customer Service and Information Technology departments
spent the same amount of money, which was 20,000 dollars.
④ The actual spending by the Administration department was
less than half the allocated budget. ⑤ The Sales department
showed the largest gap between the allocated budget and its
actual spending among the six departments.
30. Georgia O’Keeffe에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
In her art, Georgia O’Keeffe clearly showed a pioneering
spirit and an intensely individual style. At age twenty-seven,
while teaching art in South Carolina, O’Keeffe began a series
of simple, abstract charcoal drawings that expressed her own
ideas and feelings. She sent these drawings to a friend in New
York, who showed them to Alfred Stieglitz, the owner of the
influential gallery 291. Stieglitz hailed them as the “purest,
finest, sincerest things.” O’Keeffe’s greatest source of
inspiration was nature. Her best-known paintings are large,
extreme close-ups of flowers; the simplified and magnified
views compel us to look at them in a new way and to discover
their inner essence. At the same time, the paintings become
abstract arrangements of color and line, light and shadow.
While in New Mexico, she was also fascinated by the simple
geometric grace of adobe churches and the majesty of the
desert.
* adobe: 흙을 재료로 한 건축 양식의 일종
① 27세에 South Carolina에서 미술을 가르쳤다.
② 자신의 드로잉 작품들을 Stieglitz에게 보냈다.
③ 영감을 얻은 가장 큰 원천은 자연이었다.
④ 가장 잘 알려진 그림들은 클로즈업한 꽃 그림이다.
⑤ New Mexico에서 사막의 장엄함에 매료되었다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
영어 영역(B 형) 5
5
8
[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Appearance creates the first impression customers have of
food, and first impressions are important. No matter how
appealing the taste, an unattractive appearance is hard to
overlook. As humans, we do “eat with our eyes” because our
sense of sight is more highly developed than the other senses.
The sense of sight is so highly developed in humans that
messages received from other senses are often ignored if they
conflict with what is seen. Yellow candy is expected to be
lemon-flavored, and if it is grape-flavored, many people
. Strawberry
ice cream tinted with red food coloring seems to have a
stronger strawberry flavor than one that has no added food
coloring, even when there is no real difference.
① cannot correctly identify the flavor
② will not favor the grape-flavored candy
③ can clearly sense the difference in flavor
④ will be instantly attracted to the grape flavor
⑤ will enjoy the subtle difference between them
32. The Rust Belt is notorious for its poor air quality. For
decades, coal plants, steel production, and auto emissions
have pumped particulates like sulfate into the atmosphere over
the eastern U.S. Especially before air quality laws began
appearing in the 1970s, particulate pollution was behind acid
rain, respiratory disease, and ozone depletion. But a new study
from Harvard University suggests that the Rust Belt’s thick
particulate fog may have helped slow down the effects of
climate change, particularly when it was thickest. Throughout
the 20th century, global temperatures have gone up by just
under one degree Celsius. But in the U.S., eastern and central
states haven’t seen the same rise. In fact, temperatures there
actually decreased over the same period. The reason seems to
be particulate pollution. Instead of trapping warm air in the
atmosphere like carbon dioxide, fine particles like sulfate
reflect the sun’s light and heat. They may even group with
watery cloud droplets, which do the same thing. The effect
is .
* particulate: 분진, 미립 물질
① an accumulation of carbon dioxide
② a net cooling across entire regions
③ a steep acceleration of global warming
④ a significant improvement in air quality
⑤ a slow but steady increase in temperatures
33. Suppose a survivor from an airplane crash with severe
injuries struggles for days through the jungle but dies just
before reaching a village. It is tempting to think “if only he had
managed to walk to the village, he would have been rescued.”
But suppose you must try to console the victim’s relatives.
What might you say? Or suppose you wish to defend the
rescue team who got as far as the village but no further.
Your motivation to console or defend may influence the
alternative you imagine. You may decide to emphasize the
severity of the victim’s injuries and suggest “even if he had
managed to walk to the village, he still would have died.”
Sometimes thoughts about what might have been change an
antecedent event (the victim walked to the village) but leave
the outcome unchanged (he still died). “Even if...”
conditionals have been called “semifactual” because they
combine a counterfactual antecedent and a factual consequence.
Imagined semifactual alternatives are intriguing because,
unlike other thoughts about what might have been, they
suggest that . [3점]
① the consequence is unimaginable
② the antecedent is inevitable
③ the outcome is inevitable
④ the antecedent is unpredictable
⑤ the consequence is unpredictable
34. The so-called Mozart effect ― listening to Mozart will
make your child smarter ― is a good example of
by the media
through hype not warranted by the research. It all started when
researchers reported that after exposure to a selection of
Mozart’s music, college students showed an increase in spatial
reasoning for about 10 minutes on tasks like putting together
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. Note first that the research was done
on college students, not infants, and that the effect was very
brief. In addition, no one’s been able to replicate the research.
The increase in spatial reasoning, it turns out, can be generated
by any auditory stimulation (e.g., listening to a short story or
other types of music) that keeps people alert while being tested.
However, none of this has stopped eager parents ― spurred on
by fantastic claims from unethical companies ― from
purchasing Mozart CDs for their babies. [3점]
* hype: 과대 광고(선전)
① the bond between parents and children exaggerated
② a genuine scientific innovation being discarded
③ a scientific finding being distorted
④ the correlation between reasoning and music being rejected
⑤ the convergence of music and physiology made possible
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 영어 영역(B 형)
6
8
35. As the structures of our world and the conditions of
certainty have yielded to an avalanche of change, the
extent of our longing for stable, definitive leadership
. The fault
lies not with leadership but rather with ourselves and our
expectations. In the old days, leaders were supposed to
make sense of chaos, to make certainty out of doubt, and
to create positive action plans for the resolution of
paradoxes. Good leaders straightened things out. Should
chaos rear its ugly head, the leader was expected to restore
normality immediately. But chaos is now considered
normal, paradoxes cannot be resolved, and certainty is
possible only to the level of high probability. Leadership
that attempts to deliver in terms of fixing any of these can
only fail. And that is exactly what is happening. [3점]
* an avalanche of: 많은, 쇄도하는
① can only be measured by our will to establish it
② has made traditional leadership more irreplaceable
③ can create viable action plans for restoring normality
④ has vastly reduced the probability of resolving paradoxes
⑤ has been exceeded only by the impossibility of finding it
[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36. When a company comes out with a new product, its
competitors typically go on the defensive, doing whatever
they can to (A) the odds that the offering will eat
into their sales. Responses might include increasing marketing
efforts, offering discounts to channel partners, and even
lobbying for regulations that would hinder the rival’s
expansion. In many cases, though, such actions are misguided.
Although the conventional wisdom that a rival’s launch will
hurt profits is often correct, my research shows that
companies sometimes see profits increase after a rival’s
launch. The underlying mechanism is pretty simple: When a
company comes out with a new product, it often raises the
prices of its existing products. This might be designed to
make the new product look (B) and thus more
attractive by comparison. As that company adjusts its pricing,
its competitors can do the same without risking customer
defections over price. [3점]
* defection: 이탈
(A) (B)
① calculate …… exceptional
② calculate …… more striking
③ eliminate …… more upgraded
④ reduce …… up-to-date
⑤ reduce …… cheaper
37. All human societies have economic systems within which
goods and services are produced, distributed, and consumed.
In one sense, the economic aspect of culture is simply the sum
of the choices people make regarding these areas of their
lives. These choices critically determine much of people’s
lives. (A) , choosing to become a farmer rather
than an insurance broker may determine where you live, who
you are likely to meet, the sorts of behaviors you will expect
in your spouse and offspring, and so on. However, such
choices are not unlimited; rather, they are limited by our
cultures, traditions, and technologies. (B) , our
environments set the boundaries within which choices about
the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and
services are made. To the extent that economic systems are
part of culture, people in different cultures have different sorts
of economic behavior.
(A) (B)
① By contrast …… Consequently
② For example …… Conversely
③ For example …… Furthermore
④ Similarly …… Instead
⑤ Similarly …… Nevertheless
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Organic farmers grow crops that are no less plagued by
pests than those of conventional farmers; insects generally
do not discriminate between organic and conventional as
well as we do.
(A) However, most organic farmers have no choice but to rely
on chemicals as necessary supplements to their operations.
With pests often consuming up to 40 percent of the crops
grown in the United States, they do so as a matter of
course.
(B) They might refer to these substances as “botanical
extracts.” But according to Ned Groth, a senior scientist
at Consumers Union, these toxins “are not necessarily
less worrisome because they are natural.”
(C) It is true that they are far more likely than conventional
farmers to practice environmentally beneficial forms of
biological control, and that they are also more likely to
sensibly diversify their crops to reduce infestation.
* infestation: 횡행, 만연
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
영어 영역(B 형) 7
7
8
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
But the ones in which he could get up and do things like
industrial arts, drama, science projects, or P.E. were always
his favorites.
Jason always seemed to have a tough time in classes, except
in the ones where he could do something. In the classes in
which the teachers just stood and talked, or told everyone to
read, he seemed to get bored and restless. ( ① ) He soon
realized that he was not a slow or unmotivated learner; he was
a kinesthetic learner. ( ② ) Once he figured this out, he
started to use this information to his advantage. ( ③ ) He
would draw out what he learned from class on notes, posters,
and doodles. ( ④ ) He would act out things and work with
other students on projects using role play and drama. ( ⑤ )
This helped his learning come alive, and he was less bored. As
a result, he not only enjoyed school more, but his grades also
went up.
* kinesthetic: 운동 감각의
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
A narrative is not a myth the first time it is told, but only a
story or an account. What makes a story a myth is the fact
that it is received by a given society and that a given society
participates in its transmission. Obviously, it is difficult to
determine just when any story becomes a myth, but it is
clear that a narrative is not a myth when it is first told. The
intentions of the first narrator and the last narrator can be
the same, but this still does not give any special status to the
creator of a myth. It is far more important to realize that the
intentions of a given society in transmitting a narrative may
have nothing to do with the purposes of its author. Thus we
can never identify any individual creator of a myth. So long
as myth is a collective narrative by definition, the only
relevant consideration are the mentality and purposes of the
society for which the myth is a myth.
󰀻
Given the (A) nature of a myth, a narrative becomes
a myth only when a given society accepts and (B) it,
regardless of the intentions of its author.
(A) (B)
① collective …… transmits
② creative …… distributes
③ mental …… modernizes
④ primitive …… circulates
⑤ social …… evaluates
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Carrying capacity is the number of individuals that the
local resources can sustain. Individuals in a population that
has exceeded the carrying capacity of its habitat may have
poor health and suffer from malnutrition because of the
compromised living conditions. When this happens, the
weakest individuals may die, or the population as a whole
may become more vulnerable to further environmental stress
or disease. Sometimes a large number of individuals in a
population die as a result of overshooting the carrying
capacity of their habitat. This is known as a die-off.
Certain animals and plants have a built-in sense of
carrying capacity, so that instead of overshooting and having
a die-off, they remain within the limits of their habitat’s
ability to support them. Lake trout, for instance, stop
breeding as prolifically when the population density
increases too dramatically. Although this is the result of
individual responses to chemical signals from other trout
rather than a thought-out response on the part of the trout,
the result is that population numbers may
for extended periods. The trout will produce more offspring
and mature to a reproductive size at a faster rate when
populations are threatened, such as when aggressive fishing
takes place. When space and food are scarce, such as when a
lot of fish are living together in a small pond, the trout
remain smaller and reproduce more slowly. Experiments
have shown that no matter what number of lake trout a pond
is stocked with in the beginning, the population will increase
until it reaches a particular density, then level off at about the
same number.
* prolific: 다산(多産)의
41. 윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① nature’s way of regulating population density
② the relationship between nutrition and reproduction
③ the significance of habitat protection for local ecosystems
④ the necessity of protecting the lake trout population
⑤ how to preserve various habitats for lake trout
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① rise quickly
② be countless
③ remain steady
④ be unknown
⑤ fall to zero
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 영어 영역(B 형)
8
8
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
In Australia a few years ago, I met a remarkable man
named John Walton. He has since become a close friend. He
told me that when he started out in life he seemed to be
caught in a peculiar failure pattern. Whatever he tried would
start out well and then end up badly. As a schoolboy he
dropped out of several schools for this reason. He became
convinced that it was his destiny in life to make good
beginnings and then watch them fade away.
(B)
The speaker also said, “Most of you are letting the fear of
failure hold you back. All the ingredients of success are right
there inside you, if you’ll just turn your thinking around.
Don’t keep telling yourself you can’t do this or you can’t do
that. You can do ANYTHING if you think you can!” John
had never heard anything like this in his whole life. He
realized for the first time that his image of himself as a
person who started well and then faded away was all in his
head, a state of mind that could be altered any time he made
a firm decision to alter it.
(C)
At one point, John got a job with the Australian division of a
famous American company. The same dreary pattern seemed
to be unfolding: He started out well, and then things began to
slide. This didn’t surprise him much; it was what he expected
to happen. Then the company sent a motivational speaker out
to give some talks to their Australian employees, and John
was in the audience. The visitor told his listeners to visualize
themselves moving up in the company, receiving promotions,
gaining energy as they went, right up to the very top.
(D)
John went back to work with tremendous enthusiasm and
confidence and energy. He received promotions. He became
the manager of a branch in New South Wales. Finally he
became the head of the company for all of Australia. Where
once he had been dogged by failure, now everything he did
was crowned by success. He told me, “It was that one talk
that changed my self-image by giving it a little twist. It made
me see myself differently, and so I was different.”
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Stir Your Sleeping Creativity!
② The Cycle of Success and Failure
③ Failure: A Stepping Stone to Success
④ Be Positive and Success Will Embrace You
⑤ Career Development: Investment for Your Life
45. 윗글의 John Walton에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 호주에서 필자(‘I’)를 만났다.
② 학창 시절에 여러 학교를 그만두었다.
③ 유명한 미국 회사의 호주 지사에 일자리를 얻었다.
④ 동기 부여 강연회의 연설자로 참석하였다.
⑤ New South Wales에 있는 지사의 매니저가 되었다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

1번부터 22번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. You’ll love the activity you’ve signed up for.
② Don’t worry. You’ll make a lot of friends.
③ Good. You should stop your bad habits.
④ You’re right. My schedule isn’t always full.
⑤ Okay. Let me explain the activities one by one.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That was the best coffee I’ve ever tasted.
② I’ve been standing in line for 20 minutes.
③ No wonder this place is crowded with people.
④ That’s because I already bought a coffee maker.
⑤ Be careful not to burn your mouth with the coffee.
3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. What’s the best tourist attraction to visit?
② How much money should I budget for souvenirs?
③ Yeah, you’re right. It’s better to be safe than sorry.
④ I know. I need to check the weight of my luggage.
⑤ No. The insurance doesn’t cover this emergency case.
4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 진공청소기를 광고하려고
② 청소 대행업체를 소개하려고
③ 전자 제품 매장을 홍보하려고
④ 층간 소음 줄이기를 부탁하려고
⑤ 청소기 작동 방법을 설명하려고
5. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 사과가 건강에 좋은 이유
② 규칙적인 식습관의 중요성
③ 과일을 통한 노화 예방책
④ 신선한 사과 선별 기준
⑤ 효과적인 사과 보관법
6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 여가 시간 활용법
② 재택근무의 장점
③ 교통 체증의 원인
④ 에너지 절약의 중요성
⑤ 업무 스트레스 해소법
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 전자 제품 가격이 지나치게 상승하고 있다.
② 전자 제품 폐기물 문제가 심각해지고 있다.
③ 전자 제품 사용법이 점점 더 복잡해지고 있다.
④ 에너지 효율이 높은 전자 제품 사용이 중요하다.
⑤ 사용자 의견을 반영한 전자 제품 개발이 필요하다.
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 교사 － 학생 ② 감독 － 배우
③ 점원 － 고객 ④ 코치 － 선수
⑤ 화가 － 모델
9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 점심 사다 주기 ② 식당 함께 가기
③ 사진 찍어 주기 ④ 잡지 구매하기
⑤ 기사 작성하기
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to buy some drinks for the meeting
② to borrow the printer from the sales department
③ to print out the new contract at the Internet Cafe
④ to set up the new schedule for the meeting
⑤ to make a phone call to the repairperson
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 카메라를 싸게 구입한 이유를 고르시오.
① 공동으로 구매해서 ② 쿠폰이 있어서
③ 할인 기간이어서 ④ 반품된 상품이어서
⑤ 진열 상품이어서
13. 대화를 듣고, 자동차 렌트 시 고려할 사항으로 두 사람이
언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 자동차 크기 ② 연료 소비량
③ 도로 상태 ④ 자동차 보험
⑤ 렌트 기간
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $27 ② $36 ③ $40 ④ $45 ⑤ $54
15. Future Lawyers’ Internship Program에 관한 다음 설명을
듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 대학교 4학년 학생은 지원 가능하다.
② 지원자는 법학 전공자이어야 한다.
③ 영어 실력이 좋은 지원자가 유리하다.
④ 지원 가능 연령에 제한이 있다.
⑤ 지원 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
16. Tasmanian tiger에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 약 4,000년 전까지 호주 대륙에 살았었다.
② 등에 검은 줄무늬가 있었다.
③ 위장은 한 번에 많은 먹이를 먹을 수 있도록 늘어났다.
④ 들개와의 경쟁에서 져서 Tasmania 섬에서 멸종되었다.
⑤ 양을 키우는 농부에 의해서 사냥을 당했다.
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 여행 상품을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
18. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① I’m sure you’ll enjoy reading the book, too.
② Okay. I’m going to make a list of my own.
③ I agree. It’s really difficult to reach the goal.
④ Don’t give up, and you can fulfill your dreams.
⑤ Well, keeping a diary helps you to find a solution.
19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Everything will be over before you even realize it.
② It seems you’ve adapted to your surroundings well.
③ Sounds like you’re taking on more than you can handle.
④ Cramming all night will distract you from your tasks.
⑤ Scratching the surface will never accomplish the goal.
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jane이 Tom에게 할 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
Jane:
① I can’t agree with you on the ticket price.
② I really can’t wait to meet the fans tonight.
③ Our concert will definitely be a big success.
④ The safety of the audience is our first concern.
⑤ I’m pleased that many people enjoyed the concert.
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① effects of air pollution on farming
② ways to promote local fruit farming
③ problems caused by food transportation
④ origins of various agricultural produce
⑤ the change in food production patterns
22. 식품으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① tomatoes ② kiwi fruits
③ bananas ④ apples
⑤ lettuce
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
When people expect to see someone again, they are
more likely to find that person attractive, regardless of the
individual’s behavior, than if they do not have expectations
of future interaction. The expectation of future interaction
motivates people to look for positive qualities in someone
so that they will look forward to future interactions rather
than dread them, and increases the chances that people
will find the individual attractive. Conversely, when people
interact with someone whom they do not foresee meeting
again, they have little reason to search for positive
qualities. In fact, doing so may be depressing, given that
they may not have the opportunity to get to know the
person better in future interactions. Indeed, people are
sometimes motivated to find negative qualities in
individuals whom they do not expect to see again.
① 다시 만날 가능성 여부가 상대방을 평가하는 데 영향을 준다.
② 바라는 것이 많을수록 상대방에 대한 단점을 발견하기 쉽다.
③ 상대방을 배려하는 자세가 원만한 대인 관계를 가능케 한다.
④ 타인에 대한 평가 기준으로 성격이 외모보다 우선시된다.
⑤ 첫인상은 상대방과의 향후 관계를 예측하는 기준이 된다.
24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Even when scientists are able to identify seemingly
beneficial nutrients, they cannot always understand how
those nutrients will operate in a real-life context, in the
course of our daily meals. Fruits and vegetables are believed
to help prevent cancer. Scientists have believed that it is the
antioxidants in these foods that make the difference ―
compounds like beta carotene, lycopene, and vitamin E. Yet
when these molecules were extracted from fruits and
vegetables and made into supplements, they did not reduce
cancer. The beta carotene supplement actually increased the
risk of certain cancers. In other words, scientists thoroughly
misunderstood the causes of complex events. They identified
one element engaged in the process of nutrition without
fully comprehending how the system as a whole truly
functions. Nutritional scientists ― pursuing the hot paradigm
of isolating nutrients ― failed to see a multitude of links in
the complex chain that leads to good health.
* antioxidant: 산화 방지제
① problems of making nutritional supplements out of plants
② needs for an alternative scientific method for isolating
nutrients
③ insufficient understanding of how nutrients work in the
whole system
④ potential benefits of extracting molecules from fruits
and vegetables
⑤ challenge of finding beneficial nutrients that may help
prevent cancers
25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Artists create artistic works to get viewers to have
certain kinds of experiences. But the intention to convey
certain experiences to viewers is sometimes secondary to
the intention to express the artistic imagination creatively.
Consider actions generally for the moment. Think, for
example, of people watching their favorite sporting team.
Whether it is at an actual match or in a bar, at crucial
periods in a game people tend to make gestures in
anticipation or cheer in exhortation. They often want to
convey their sense of urgency to the team, or people at
the bar may want to show their disgust to others in the
crowd. But they often express themselves in this manner
without any thought for what others think or how they
may respond. Actions we perform through which we
intend to express our feelings, thoughts, and attitudes
need not have any communicative intent for how others
may respond. At least some works should be understood
as the representation of just this kind of action.
* exhortation: 권고, 충고
① Artistic Act: To Express Rather than to Communicate
② Artistic Masterpieces: Products of Viewers’ Desires
③ Artistic Works Beyond Artists’ Imagination
④ Artworks Not for Artists but for Viewers
⑤ Sports: A Tool for Expressing Oneself?
26. 밑줄 친 her[She]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
I was reminded of our mission earlier this year when
my mother sold her house. Because of my father’s failing
health, my parents recently moved from Florida to
Maryland to live with my elder sister and ① her family.
At my mom’s request, my brothers, sisters, and I sorted
through all ② her belongings. ③ She told us to keep or
discard whatever we pleased. For myself I kept a solitary
piece of china, one of the few remaining plates from the
set my grandfather bought my mother for ④ her wedding.
I can still remember the set in better days ― serving
many a guest on a Sunday afternoon. But its comrades
have all been broken or have disappeared, and this plate
is all I have. It is delicate and faded ― you can no
longer read the pattern name printed on the back. But it
hangs in my dining room as a pleasant reminder of ⑤ her
hospitality.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
27. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
It had long been something of a mystery where, and
on what, the northern fur seals of the eastern Pacific feed
during the winter, (A) when / which they spend off the
coast of North America from California to Alaska. There
is no evidence that they are feeding to any great extent
on sardines, mackerel, or other commercially important
fishes. Presumably four million seals could not compete
with commercial fishermen for the same species without
the fact (B) being / is known. But there is some evidence
on the diet of the fur seals, and it is highly significant.
Their stomachs have yielded the bones of a species of
fish that has never been seen alive. Indeed, not even its
remains (C) has / have been found anywhere except in the
stomachs of seals. Ichthyologists say that this ‘seal fish’
belongs to a group that typically inhabits very deep water,
off the edge of the continental shelf.
* ichthyologist: 어류학자
(A) (B) (C)
① when …… is …… have
② when …… being …… have
③ which …… being …… have
④ which …… being …… has
⑤ which …… is …… has
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Occasionally, there are children who have trouble
understanding that their clothing choice is inappropriate or
even unhealthy. Some children ① follow the suggestion
that sandals may not be the best option for a snowy day.
For those kids, ② experience may be the best teacher.
For example, when Lydia was eight years old, she
insisted on wearing her favorite sandals to school despite
③ warnings that the sidewalks were covered in snow and
slush. Her mom ④ worried that she would arrive at
school with cold, wet feet, but Lydia would not change
her mind. Of course, her mother was right. While Lydia
did have some very uncomfortable toes because they
became soaked and frozen on her way to and from
school, she learned that sometimes fashion isn’t ⑤ worth
the price of serious discomfort.
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentage of women in wage
employment in the non-agricultural sector in 1990 and 2006.
① In Latin America and the Caribbean, women’s waged
non-agricultural employment increased more than five
percentage points between 1990 and 2006. ② In 2006, the
percentage of women’s waged non-agricultural employment
in East Asia and Pacific countries was twice as high as that
of South Asia. ③ In that same year, the percentage of
women’s waged non-agricultural employment in the Middle
East and North Africa was less than that of Sub-Saharan
Africa by ten percentage points. ④ Despite the improvement
between 1990 and 2006, South Asia showed the smallest
increase in the percentage of women in waged non-agricultural
employment. ⑤ Between 1990 and 2006, the increase in the
percentage of women’s waged non-agricultural employment
in Sub-Saharan Africa was larger than that of the Middle
East and North Africa.
30. Zelia Maria Magdalena Nuttall에 관한 다음 글의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
American archaeologist-ethnohistorian Zelia Maria Magdalena
Nuttall was well known especially for her investigations of
pre-Columbian culture and her studies of Mexican peoples
and native Mexican plants. Nuttall was a brilliant archival
researcher and self-trained archaeologist who very early carved
a career for herself by pursuing independent research and
publishing in scholarly journals. Before age 30 she became
a member of several highly prestigious scientific societies
on the basis of her work. She was the winner of three
medals for the exhibits of the results of her archival work
and archaeological research, which she presented in Europe
and the United States. Nuttall was never a part of university
teaching faculty, and indeed there is no indication that she
would have accepted such a position had it been offered.
Early in her career, she was appointed Honorary Assistant
in Mexican Archaeology at the Peabody Museum of
Harvard University, a post she held for forty-seven years.
* archival: 기록의
① 멕시코의 토종 식물에 관한 연구로 잘 알려졌다.
② 독자적인 연구와 학술지 논문 발표를 통해 경력을 쌓았다.
③ 30세가 되기 전에 권위 있는 여러 학회의 회원이 되었다.
④ 기록 작업과 고고학 연구의 결과물 전시로 세 개의 메달을 받았다.
⑤ Harvard 대학의 교수로 47년간 학생들을 가르쳤다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Wood is a material that is widely acknowledged to be
environmentally friendly. It has been welcome as an
alternative material for a long time in building houses
instead of cement or bricks. However, it is not always
easy to of one particular
material such as wood over another. Many species of tree
are now endangered, including mahogany and teak, and
deforestation, particularly in tropical rainforests, has had a
severe impact both on local communities and on native
plants and wildlife. Where wood is harvested and then
transported halfway across the globe, the associated energy
costs are high, causing a negative impact on the
environment. What is more, where wood is treated with
chemicals to improve fire- and pest-resistance, its healthful
properties are compromised.
* mahogany: 마호가니(적갈색 열대산 목재)
① increase the inherent resistance
② favor the chemical properties
③ dominate the natural habitats
④ evaluate the relative merits
⑤ deny the cost advantage
32. So often, we get caught up in the minutiae of our jobs
― tedious annoyances and struggles that may be temporary
roadblocks but feel more like concrete mountains. While
there’s plenty of research that shows that people who
work with the muscles above their neck create all kinds
of stresses for themselves, it’s the people who focus on
the why of their jobs (as opposed to the what and the
how) who can manage the day-to-day problems more
easily. That is, if you can define the purpose of your
career or feel passionate about the mission of your
company, you can much more easily handle the occasional
server maintenance that disrupts your in-box. The flip side
is that if you’re working in any area (or company) that
doesn’t align with your own value, all the little stuff
.
* minutiae: 상세, 세목, 사소한 점
① focuses on the why, belittling the what and the how
② liberates you from the prison of daily routines
③ snowballs into a big ball of daily disasters
④ paves your way to climb up the corporate ladder
⑤ illuminates the true value of what you have to do
33. People knowingly or unknowingly will take too much,
even though it is not for anyone’s collective or long-term
good. As Hardin put it, “Freedom in a commons brings
ruin to all.” Consider a traffic jam on a main road going
into any big city. Each person picks that particular road
for the logical reason that it’s the fastest route. In the
beginning, each additional car does not slow the traffic
down, as there is enough room on the road for the
additional drivers. At some point, however, each car
reduces the average speed, and eventually there are so
many drivers that the traffic slows to a crawl. All the
people seeking to minimize their own driving time add
up to a longer commute for everyone. Doing what’s
rational ,
including you. On a global scale, the same thing can
befall environmental issues such as overfished seas and
rivers, air pollution, and water scarcity. [3점]
① leads to logical consequences for all drivers
② is compatible with the maximum benefit of each driver
③ enhances unselfish interests of each and every commuter
④ is not well executed by the unexpected behaviors of some
drivers
⑤ results in a negative outcome to the collective interest
of all drivers
34. Researchers asked college student volunteers to think
through a fantasy version of an experience (looking
attractive in a pair of high-heeled shoes, winning an essay
contest, or getting an A on a test) and then evaluated the
fantasy’s effect on the subjects and on how things
unfolded in reality. When participants envisioned the most
positive outcome, their energy levels, as measured by
blood pressure, dropped, and they reported having a worse
experience with the actual event than those who had
conjured more realistic or even negative visions. To assess
subjects’ real life experiences, the researchers compared
lists of goals that subjects had set for themselves against
what they had actually accomplished and also relied on
self-reports. “When we fantasize about it ― especially when
you fantasize something very positive ― it’s almost like
you are actually living it,” says one of the study’s
co-authors. That ,
draining the incentive to “get energized to go and get it,”
she explains. Subjects may be better off imagining how to
surmount obstacles instead of ignoring them. [3점]
① prompts you into assessing the real life as it is
② turns a rosy dream into an actual accomplishment
③ renders your goal independent of the fantasy world
④ tricks the mind into thinking the goal has been achieved
⑤ deceives your mind into believing obstacles are insurmountable
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
35. When confronted by a seemingly simple pointing task,
where their desires are put in conflict with outcomes,
chimpanzees find it impossible to exhibit subtle selfserving
cognitive strategies in the immediate presence of
a desired reward. However, such tasks are mastered
. In one
study, chimps were confronted by a simple choice; two
plates holding tasty food items were presented, each with
a different number of treats. If the chimp pointed to the
plate having more treats, it would immediately be given
to a fellow chimp in an adjacent cage, and the frustrated
subject would receive the smaller amount. After hundreds
and hundreds of trials, these chimps could not learn to
withhold pointing to the larger reward. However, these
same chimps had already been taught the symbolic concept
of simple numbers. When those numbers were placed on the
plates as a substitute for the actual rewards, the chimps
promptly learned to point to the smaller numbers first,
thereby obtaining the larger rewards for themselves. [3점]
① as immediate rewards replace delayed ones
② when an alternative symbol system is employed
③ if their desires for the larger rewards are satisfied
④ when material rewards alternate with symbolic ones
⑤ if the value of the number is proportional to the amount
of the reward
[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36. After making a choice, the decision ultimately changes
our estimated pleasure, enhancing the expected pleasure
from the selected option and decreasing the expected
pleasure from the rejected option. If we were not inclined
to (A) the value of our options rapidly so that
they concur with our choices, we would likely second-guess
ourselves to the point of insanity. We would ask ourselves
again and again whether we should have chosen Greece
over Thailand, the toaster over the coffee maker, and Jenny
over Michele. Consistently second-guessing ourselves would
interfere with our daily functioning and promote a negative
effect. We would feel anxious and confused, regretful and
sad. Have we done the right thing? Should we change our
mind? These thoughts would result in a permanent halt.
We would find ourselves ― literally ― stuck, overcome by
(B) and unable to move forward. On the other
hand, reevaluating our alternatives after making a decision
increases our commitment to the action taken and keeps us
moving forward. [3점]
(A) (B)
① disregard …… indecision
② disregard …… decision
③ disclose …… decision
④ update …… prejudice
⑤ update …… indecision
37. Traditionally we have assessed mathematics ability based
on the number of correct answers on a page full of
computational problems. Learning and memorizing facts,
therefore, was the key component to the mathematics
instructional program. Recently, (A) , many teachers
have started placing a greater emphasis on mathematical
understanding, problem solving, hands-on experiences, and
collaborative work. This change in the instructional
program can be attributed to well-informed teachers and the
work of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Now teachers should realize that their students will be
using mathematics in a world where calculators, computers,
and other forms of technology are readily available.
Therefore, the application of mathematics, rather than mere
fact acquisition, is what will be expected of them in the
workplace and in life, and (B) mathematics
instruction should mirror this real life application.
(A) (B)
① however …… otherwise
② however …… nonetheless
③ however …… consequently
④ moreover …… accordingly
⑤ moreover …… similarly
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Most of the words we use and the meanings we think
about are a combination of simpler ideas.
(A) Some of them are specialized for sitting at certain high
places, like bar stools. If you learned about a culture
in which a certain type of chair was used only for the
purpose of sitting while waiting for a bus, you might
think this is odd but would have no difficulty
understanding it.
(B) Consider a chair. Before you can have an idea of a
chair, you need to understand that there exist in the
world certain functional objects. Some of these objects
support human activity, in this case, sitting.
(C) The combination of the concepts chair and waiting for
bus allows you to create the new complex concept
chair used while waiting for bus. But the basic concept
of chair is built out of the simpler ideas that we take
for granted: object, furniture, sitting.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
The experimenter then changed the context so that the
participants had to do a subtly different task.
By changing the focus or context of a task, we can get
renewed energy even when we feel that we are completely
out of energy. To demonstrate this, a psychologist asked
people to take part in what she called ‘semi-free tasks’. The
tasks included drawing, repeatedly writing ‘ababababababab...’,
or reading a short poem. ( ① ) The participants were
asked to do these tasks until they felt exhausted. ( ② )
Those drawing were asked to redraw their last picture to
demonstrate how quickly they could draw. ( ③ ) Those
writing ‘abab’ were asked to sign their name and address.
( ④ ) In this new context their fatigue disappeared. ( ⑤ )
This phenomenon of creating a second wind can be seen in
action at airports where security officers rotate around different
stations to stop routine-induced fatigue from settling in.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
During the 1970s, researchers began to suggest that
human vulnerability to hazards, rather than the hazards
themselves, was central to understanding the importance
of hazards, particularly when considering that a city is a
geographical focus for large populations. Further, it was
reported that human and material losses from disasters
had increased during the 20th century. This happened at
a time when cities in the developing world were
growing at unprecedented rates, bringing together large
populations of low income urban residents, often on
hazardous spontaneous settlements which made them far
more vulnerable to natural and human-induced hazards.
It is precisely this issue of vulnerability on which a
number of social scientists focused, arguing that although
floods, landslides and earthquakes are natural processes,
the disasters that can be associated with them are not a
result of natural processes, but of human vulnerability.
󰀻
With the dramatic growth of (A) in developing
countries, environmental hazards could turn into disasters
for those who are unable to (B) their impacts.
(A) (B)
① population …… magnify
② economy …… figure out
③ economy …… cope with
④ cities …… cope with
⑤ cities …… magnify
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
If you don’t get the kind of information failure
provides, you’ll end up with unrealistic expectations for
yourself, explains a psychologist. You could wind up in
a position where failure, which has gathered under cover
of darkness, reveals itself all at once.
We should hope, then, for exposure to failure, early
and often. The sociologist Glen Elder proposed that
there is a sensitive period for growth ― late teens
through early 30s ― during which failures are most
beneficial. Such a pattern seems to promote the trait
sometimes called equanimity. We learn that trauma is
survivable, so we don’t plunge too deeply following
setbacks. Nor, conversely, do we soar too high on our
successes. Some businesses in Silicon Valley and on
Wall Street make a point of hiring ex-pro athletes to
their staffs. It’s not just that their high profile draws
business. It’s because athletes are good at recovering
from their failures. “We needed people who could
perform and not get emotionally attached to losses,” a
Chicago oil trader told the New York Times, explaining
why the firm likes athletes on the trading floor,
particularly in ugly economic times like these. The
image is of a rider easy in the saddle. Nothing can so
surprise her ― either for good or ill ― that she’ll be
knocked off.
One way to help keep life’s slings and arrows from
knocking you off course is to ensure your life is
, says Stephen Berglas, a California
psychologist and personal coach. That way, a setback in
any one area won’t mean in your mind that you’re a
failure categorically. Call it spreading your risk across
your emotional portfolio ― or adding another leg to the
furniture for balance, says Berglas.
* equanimity: 마음의 평정
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Do Not Let Failure Fail You
② Recipe for Attaining Physical Stability
③ Physical Toughness and Mental Flexibility
④ How to Survive Emotional Unrest in Sports
⑤ Failure as an Enemy of Emotional Calmness
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① illusionary ② predictable
③ convergent ④ straightforward
⑤ multidimensional
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
To be creative problem solvers, people must learn to
approach complexity with a certain naive simplicity. And
by letting their thinking become more free, they can
improve their chances of discovering new unencumbered
perceptions of old problems or entirely new creations.
For this, they can mentally play with the ideas in a
childlike manner. Here is an example story. In a small
Moravian village at the time of the old Austrian empire,
an inspector from the Ministry of Education arrived one
day to visit the schoolroom. It was part of (a) his duty
to make such periodic inspections of the schools.
* unencumbered: 방해받지 않는
(B)
At the end of the hour, after he had observed the
class, he stood up and said: “I am glad to see that you
children are doing well in your studies. I am satisfied
with your progress. Therefore, before I go, there is one
question I would like to ask. How many hairs does a
horse have?” Very quickly one little nine-year-old boy
raised his hand, to the astonishment of the teacher and
the visitor. (b) He stood up and said, “The horse has
3,571,962 hairs.” The inspector wonderingly asked, “And
how do you know that this is the right number?” The
boy replied, “If you do not believe me, you could count
them yourself.”
(C)
It was a year later, and the inspector was back again
at the village school for his annual visit. As the teacher
was walking along the aisle with (c) him to the door, he
stopped and said, “By the way, Mr. Inspector, how did
your colleagues like the story of the horse and the
number of his hairs?” The inspector slapped the teacher
on the back. “Oh yes,” he said, “you know, I was
really very anxious to tell that story ― and a fine story
it was ― but you see, I wasn’t able for the life of me
to remember the number of hairs.”
(D)
The inspector broke into loud laughter, thoroughly
enjoying the boy’s remark. As the teacher escorted (d) him
along the aisle to the door, still laughing heartily, he
said: “What an amusing story! I must tell this story to
my colleagues when I return to Vienna. I can already see
how they will take it; they enjoy nothing better than a
good joke.” And with that, he took (e) his leave.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (C) － (D)
② (B) － (D) － (C)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 inspector에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Moravia에 있는 한 학교를 방문했다.
② 학생들의 학업 향상에 만족한다고 말했다.
③ 말의 털이 몇 개인지 기억할 수 없었다고 말했다.
④ 소년의 대답이 재미있었지만 억지로 웃음을 참았다.
⑤ Vienna에 가서 동료들에게 이 이야기를 들려주겠다고 말했다.

1번부터 22번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Right. We need to get a new fridge.
② Oh! Then I’ll go buy some right now.
③ Sure. Let me show you how to cook them.
④ Wow! This sandwich tastes really good.
⑤ Yeah. This is a good place for a picnic.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No. You don’t have to pay the late fee.
② Right. I’ll pay now and get the book later.
③ It’s my turn. So you have to wait until I’m done.
④ Okay. I’ll put your name on it, so you’ll be the next.
⑤ Why not? Wait here and I’ll go find the book for you.
3. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It’s hard to endure the loss of a cherished puppy.
② You shouldn’t have taken your eyes off the road.
③ You should break the habit of being late all the time.
④ Don’t worry. You can do it if you put your mind to it.
⑤ What a coincidence! I was about to drop by your house.
4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 주차 관리 요원을 모집하려고
② 요가 센터 개장을 홍보하려고
③ 주차장 확장 공사를 안내하려고
④ 체육 시설 안전 점검을 촉구하려고
⑤ 새로운 요가 프로그램을 소개하려고
5. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 배낚시 전 확인해야 할 안전 장비
② 배낚시를 즐기는 다양한 방법
③ 선상 화재의 주된 원인
④ 연령에 따른 구명조끼의 종류
⑤ 배낚시 도구의 효과적인 관리 요령
6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 컴퓨터 구매 시 고려 사항
② 컴퓨터 보안 프로그램의 필요성
③ 컴퓨터 내부 먼지 제거의 중요성
④ 컴퓨터 전용 청소 도구의 사용법
⑤ 컴퓨터 사용 시간과 건강 간의 관계
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장난감의 과도한 사용은 학습을 방해한다.
② 장난감의 위생 상태를 확인할 필요가 있다.
③ 장난감 총 사용 시 안전사고에 유의해야 한다.
④ 장난감 종류에 따라 연령 제한을 두어야 한다.
⑤ 장난감 총은 아이들에게 부정적인 영향을 미친다.
8. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 서점 직원 － 고객 ② 연극 연출가 － 배우
③ 동화 작가 － 독자 ④ 도서관 사서 － 학생
⑤ 출판사 편집장 － 삽화가
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 수업 참관하기
② 만화 그려 주기
③ 팸플릿 복사하기
④ 읽기 자료 찾아 주기
⑤ 현장 학습 일정표 만들기
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2
8
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to participate in the meeting to talk about the matter
② to install a device in the car to record accidents
③ to repair the damaged car before she gets back
④ to prepare for a business trip with her customer
⑤ to watch the security video to find who hit the car
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 head chef에 지원하지 못하는 이유를
고르시오.
① 다음 주에 근무를 시작해야 해서
② 기숙사 생활을 해야 해서
③ 호텔에서의 요리사 경력이 부족해서
④ 요리 대회 수상 실적이 없어서
⑤ 프랑스어를 못해서
13. 대화를 듣고, 예술 작품을 이해하는 데 도움이 되는 것으로
두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 작품의 주제 ② 예술가의 개인 정보
③ 작품의 역사적 배경 ④ 작품에 대한 전문가의 견해
⑤ 작품에 사용된 재료
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $500 ② $600 ③ $700 ④ $1,000 ⑤ $1,200
15. Amazing Art Lovers에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 43년의 역사를 가진 동아리이다.
② 지난 10년 동안 지역 사회에서 자원 봉사를 해 왔다.
③ 일주일 전에, 공장 벽에 그림을 그려 달라고 요청받았다.
④ 전공에 관계없이 신입 회원을 찾고 있다.
⑤ 전화번호가 웹사이트에 게시되어 있다.
16. sausage tree에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① 비가 연중 내리는 곳에서 늘 푸르다.
② 빨간색 꽃이 해질 녘에 핀다.
③ 꽃은 수분이 이루어지면 그다음 날 아침에 떨어진다.
④ 열매는 소시지를 닮았고 먹을 수 있다.
⑤ 지역민들은 악령을 쫓아내기 위해 열매를 사용한다.
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 제품을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
18. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① You have to renew your driver’s license.
② I’ll let you take the midterm a second time.
③ Then you should easily pass the test this time.
④ I don’t think memorizing is the best way to study.
⑤ No wonder you’re curious about your test results.
19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① And I’ll ask my teacher if that is permitted.
② Then I should garden to relieve my stress.
③ I can do better if I conquer my indecision.
④ I promise to help you more in the garden.
⑤ So I should work on it a little every day.
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Paul이 Jennifer에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Paul:
① Would you fax me the document right away?
② Will you copy the document for the meeting?
③ If you don’t hurry, you’ll miss your flight.
④ I have no choice but to visit your office.
⑤ Please check whether you got my fax.
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① reasons for extreme competition among animals for food
② how repeated changes in nature affect animal behavior
③ drawbacks to animals’ adaptation to nature
④ how to preserve endangered wildlife effectively
⑤ types of threats from serious environmental changes
22. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① butterflies ② moths ③ frogs
④ birds ⑤ fish
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3
8
23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
In our efforts to be the good child, the uncomplaining
employee, or the cooperative patient, many of us fall into the
trap of trying to please people by going along with whatever
they want us to do. At times, we lose track of our own
boundaries and needs, and the cost of this could be our life,
both symbolically and literally. When we are unable to set
healthy limits, it causes distress in our relationships. But when
we learn to say no to what we don’t feel like doing in order to
say yes to our true self, we feel empowered, and our
relationships with others improve. So don’t be afraid to say
no. Try to catch yourself in the moment and use your true
voice to say what you really want to say.
① 난관을 극복할 때 성취감이 생긴다.
② 항상 타인의 입장을 먼저 고려해야 한다.
③ 자신이 원하지 않는 일은 거절할 필요가 있다.
④ 자신의 의견을 고집하면 대인 관계가 악화된다.
⑤ 제안을 승낙하기 전에는 그 의도를 파악해야 한다.
24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
In order to successfully release himself from the control of
his parents, a child must be secure in his parents’ power, as
represented by their loving authority. The more effectively they
communicate that authority, the more secure the child feels, and
the better able he is to move away from them toward a life of his
own. During this lengthy process, whenever he feels threatened,
he turns back toward the safety of his parents’ love and
authority. In other words, it is impossible for a child to
successfully release himself unless he knows exactly where his
parents stand, both literally and figuratively. That requires, of
course, that his parents know where they themselves stand. If
they don’t know where they stand ― if, in other words, they are
insecure in their authority ― they cannot communicate security
to their child, and he cannot move successfully away from
them. Under the circumstances, he will become clingy, or
disobedient, or both.
① necessity of parental intervention in ensuring children’s
safety
② roles of parental authority in children’s social skills
development
③ consequences of offering parental supervision for children’s
independence
④ requirements for preventing children from being disobedient
to their parents
⑤ importance of communicating parental authority to children
for their independence
25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The names of pitches are associated with particular
frequency values. Our current system is called A440 because
the note we call ‘A’ that is in the middle of the piano keyboard
has been fixed to have a frequency of 440 Hz. This is entirely
arbitrary. We could fix ‘A’ at any frequency, such as 439 or
424; different standards were used in the time of Mozart than
today. Some people claim that the precise frequencies affect
the overall sound of a musical piece and the sound of
instruments. Led Zeppelin, a band popular in the 70s, often
tuned their instruments away from the modern A440 standard
to give their music an uncommon sound, and perhaps to link it
with the European children’s folk songs that inspired many of
their compositions. Many purists insist on hearing baroque
music on period instruments, both because the instruments
have a different sound and because they are designed to play
the music in its original tuning standard, something that
purists deem important.
① Should ‘A’ Always Be Tuned at 440 Hz?
② Arbitrary Tuning: A New Trend in Music
③ How to Correctly Measure Frequency Values
④ How Do Musicians Detect Pitch Differences?
⑤ Unstable Pitches: A Common Thread in Music
26. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
A friend of mine was sitting in the Miami airport reading a
magazine while she waited to catch a plane to New York. Her
attention was distracted by a rough, noisy quarrel taking place
at the ticket counter. “But I must get to New York today!”
① an angry lady hotly told the clerk. “I’m sorry, ma’am, but
there are no more seats available,” came the reply. “But my
eight-year-old daughter is on that plane. ② I can’t let her fly
into New York City all by herself,” she cried. “Sorry, lady. The
flight is full,” came the same answer. My friend had been
watching and listening to the woman’s woeful story, and her
heart was touched with compassion for ③ the distressed mother.
She walked over to the ticket agent and offered to take a later
flight, if it meant the woman could use ④ her ticket to travel to
New York with her daughter. The agent welcomed my friend’s
solution and quickly issued a revalidated ticket to ⑤ the woman,
and then arranged for another flight for my friend.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4
8
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Oxygen is what it is all about. Ironically, the stuff that gives
us life eventually kills it. The ultimate life force lies in tiny
cellular factories of energy, called mitochondria, ① that burn
nearly all the oxygen we breathe in. But breathing has a price.
The combustion of oxygen that keeps us alive and active
② sending out by-products called oxygen free radicals. They
have Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde characteristics. On the one
hand, they help guarantee our survival. For example, when the
body mobilizes ③ to fight off infectious agents, it generates a
burst of free radicals to destroy the invaders very efficiently.
On the other hand, free radicals move ④ uncontrollably
through the body, attacking cells, rusting their proteins,
piercing their membranes and corrupting their genetic code
until the cells become dysfunctional and sometimes give up
and die. These fierce radicals, ⑤ built into life as both
protectors and avengers, are potent agents of aging.
* oxygen free radical: 활성 산소
** membrane: (해부학) 얇은 막
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
When people started to plant stored seed stock deliberately,
they also began protecting their plants. This changed the
evolutionary ① pressure that these food plants experienced, as
they no longer had to survive in a natural environment.
Instead, people created a new environment for them, and
selected for other characteristics than nature previously had.
Seeds recovered at archaeological sites clearly show that
farmers selected for larger seeds and ② thinner seed coats.
Thick seed coats are often ③ essential for seeds to survive in
a natural environment because the seeds of many wild plants
remain dormant for months until winter is over and rain sets
in. But under human management thick seed coats are
unnecessary, as farmers ④ evade responsibility for storing
seeds away from moisture and predators. In fact, seeds with
thinner coats were ⑤ preferred as they are easier to eat or
process into flour, and they allow seedlings to sprout more
quickly when sown.
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the Canadian volunteer rates and
average annual hours of seven age groups in 2007. ① In these
groups, the volunteer rates ranged from 29% to 58%, and the
Canadian average rate was 46%. ② The average annual hours
increased with age except for the group aged between 25 and
34, which volunteered an average of 133 hours. ③ The 15-24
age group showed the highest volunteer rate but the second
fewest average annual hours. ④ The 35-44 age group had
fewer average annual hours than the 45-54 age group, while
the 55-64 and 65-74 age groups showed the same average
annual hours. ⑤ Despite their lowest rate of volunteering,
seniors aged 75 and older gave more hours on average than
any other age group.
30. Fourier에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier was a French mathematician
and physicist. When he was eight years old, his father died, and
less than a year after this tragedy, his mother passed away,
leaving him an orphan. A charitable lady helped him attend a
local military school. He wanted to become an officer but was
not allowed to because he was the son of a tailor. In 1795, he
became a teacher at the École Normale in Paris. During the
post-Revolution frenzy, he spoke out against the use of the
guillotine, for which he almost lost his life. When Napoleon
invaded Egypt in 1798, Fourier and other scholars accompanied
the expedition. Having returned to France, Fourier began his
research on heat conduction. His mathematical theory of heat
conduction earned him lasting fame. During his stay in Egypt he
contracted a strange illness that confined him to well-heated
rooms for the rest of his life. On May 16, 1830, Fourier died in
Paris.
* guillotine: 단두대
① 프랑스의 수학자이자 물리학자였다.
② 재단사의 아들이라는 이유로 장교가 되지 못했다.
③ 단두대 사용에 반대하다가 목숨을 잃을 뻔했다.
④ 열전도에 관한 수학 이론으로 명성을 얻었다.
⑤ 이집트에서 프랑스로 돌아온 후 이상한 병에 걸렸다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5
8
[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Sometimes all the outcomes customers are trying to achieve
in one area have a negative effect on other outcomes. This is
very common when companies are busy listening to the ‘voice
of the customer.’ Traveling salespeople, for example, may say
they want a smaller cell phone, but they may not have thought
about how hard that tiny phone will be to use. Carpenters may
request a lightweight circular saw without thinking about the
fact that it will no longer have the power to get through some of
the more difficult jobs. When customers make requests for new
product features, they are usually focused on solving just one
problem and are not thinking of how their requested solution
will .
In this situation, customers request new features but reject the
resulting product when they realize the ramifications of their
suggestions ― the added feature turns out to be worthless
because of the problems it causes.
* ramification: 파생된 문제
① impact other product or service functions
② delay the introduction of innovative products
③ induce other customers to make additional requests
④ bring about excessive competition among companies
⑤ discourage companies from listening to customers’ voices
32. The success of human beings depends crucially on numbers
and connections. A few hundred people cannot sustain a
sophisticated technology. Recall that Australia was colonized
45,000 years ago by pioneers spreading east from Africa along
the shore of Asia. The vanguard of such a migration must have
been small in number and must have traveled comparatively
light. The chances are they had only a sample of the
technology available to their relatives back at the Red Sea
crossing. This may explain why Australian aboriginal
technology, although it developed and elaborated steadily over
the ensuing millennia, was lacking in so many features of the
Old World ― elastic weapons, for example, such as bows and
catapults, were unknown, as were ovens. It was not that they
were ‘primitive’ or that they had mentally regressed; it was
that they
and did not have a dense enough population and therefore a
large enough collective brain to develop them much further. [3점]
* catapult: 투석기
① were too tightly connected to develop new technologies
② focused on developing and elaborating elastic weapons
③ had arrived with only a subset of technologies
④ inherited none of their relatives’ technologies in Africa
⑤ failed to transfer their technical insights to the Old World
33. Policymaking is seen to be more objective when experts
play a large role in the creation and implementation of the
policy, and when utilitarian rationality is the dominant value
that guides policy. Through the use of the scientific method to
determine the facts of any given policy situation, the power of
social constructions is supposedly diminished, and solutions to
social problems are discovered in an objective way. This
process creates an illusion of neutrality and implies a
transcendence of the pitfalls and inequalities commonly
associated with policymaking. From this perspective, scientists
and professionals emerge as the appropriate experts to be
consulted in policymaking, while local citizen input and
knowledge is often viewed as unnecessary. Scientific and
professional policy design does not necessarily escape the
pitfalls of degenerative politics. Scientific and professional
expertise often relies on a particular type of knowledge that is
limited to utility and rationality considerations. This approach
to policy typically does not consider values and cultural factors
that cannot be measured empirically. Scientifically designed
policies can serve interests that run counter to the public
interest. They . [3점]
* transcendence: 초월
① use empirically proven theories to reflect locals’ input
② do stress cultural values rather than utilitarian ones
③ may be free from the inequalities of policymaking
④ can reinforce unequal and unjust relationships
⑤ reveal objective solutions to social problems
34. Like many errors and biases that seem irrational on the
surface, auditory looming turns out, on closer examination, to
be pretty smart. Animals like rhesus monkeys have evolved
the same bias. This intentional error functions as an advance
warning system, manned by the self-protection subself,
providing individuals with a margin of safety when they are
confronted with potentially dangerous approaching objects.
If you spot a rhinoceros or hear an avalanche speeding
toward you, auditory looming will motivate you to jump
out of the way now rather than wait until the last second.
The evolutionary benefits of immediately getting out of the
way of approaching dangers were so strong that natural
selection endowed us ― and other mammals ― with brains
that . Although
this kind of bias might inhibit economically rational
judgment in laboratory tasks, it leads us to behave in a
deeply rational manner in the real world. Being accurate is not
always smart. [3점]
* avalanche: 눈사태
① intentionally see and hear the world inaccurately
② are geared to evaluate aural information precisely
③ deliberately make rational yet ineffective decisions
④ prompt us to overlook dangers without thinking rationally
⑤ accurately detect, but irrationally ignore, approaching dangers
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6
8
35. Mathematics will attract those it can attract, but it will do
nothing to overcome resistance to science. Science is universal
in principle but in practice it speaks to very few. Mathematics
may be considered a communication skill of the highest type,
frictionless so to speak; and at the opposite pole from
mathematics, the fruits of science show the practical benefits of
science without the use of words. But those fruits are
ambivalent. Science as science does not speak; ideally,
all scientific concepts are mathematized when scientists
communicate with one another, and when science displays its
products to non-scientists it need not, and indeed is not able to,
resort to salesmanship. When science speaks to others, it is no
longer science, and the scientist becomes or has to hire a
publicist who dilutes the exactness of mathematics. In doing
so, the scientist reverses his drive toward mathematical
exactness in favor of rhetorical vagueness and metaphor, thus
. [3점]
① degrading his ability to use the scientific language needed
for good salesmanship
② surmounting the barrier to science by associating science
with mathematics
③ inevitably making others who are unskillful in mathematics
hostile to science
④ neglecting his duty of bridging the gap between science
and the public
⑤ violating the code of intellectual conduct that defines him
as a scientist
[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36. F. Scott Fitzgerald thought that the test of first-rate
intelligence was the ability to hold two opposed ideas in mind
at the same time and still function. The eons shaped our brains
in the (A) direction. Confirmation bias is a term for the
way the mind systematically avoids confronting contradiction.
It does this by overvaluing evidence that confirms what we
already think or feel and undervaluing or simply disregarding
evidence that refutes it. Testimony from members of the Crow
tribe about the destruction of their culture provides an extreme
and tragic example of this. A man named Plenty Coups
reported that “when the buffalo went away, the hearts of my
people fell to the ground and they could not lift them up again.
After this nothing happened.” He was not alone in describing
the depth of despair as the end of history. “Nothing happened
after that,” another Crow warrior said. “We just lived.” The
emotion was so strong that the brain (B) evidence of the
continued existence of normal, everyday life that might have
eased it. [3점]
* eon: 무한히 긴 시대, 영겁
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① opposite …… retained ② opposite …… rejected
③ wrong …… validated ④ same …… falsified
⑤ same …… overlooked
37. Oil and gas resources are not likely to be impacted by
climate change because they result from a process that takes
millions of years and are geologically trapped. (A) ,
climate change may not only force the shutting down of oiland
gas-producing areas, but increase the possibility of
exploration in areas of the Arctic through the reduction in ice
cover. Thus, while climate change may not impact these
resources, oil and gas reserves and known or potential
resources could be affected by new climate conditions, since
climate change may affect access to these resources. In
Siberia, (B) , the actual exploration challenge is the
time required to access, produce, and deliver oil under extreme
environmental conditions, where temperatures in January
range from —20℃ to —35℃. Warming may ease extreme
environmental conditions, expanding the production frontier.
(A) (B)
① On the other hand …… however
② On the other hand …… for instance
③ As a result …… for instance
④ As a result …… however
⑤ In other words …… therefore
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
We tend to perceive the door of a classroom as
rectangular no matter from which angle it is viewed.
Actually, the rectangular door of a classroom projects a
rectangular image on our retina only when it is viewed
directly from the front.
(A) Slowly the trapezoid becomes thinner and thinner, and all
that is projected on the retina is a vertical line, which is
the thickness of the door. These changes we can observe
and distinguish, but we do not accept them.
(B) Similarly, a round coin is seen as round even when
viewed from an angle at which, objectively, it should
appear elliptical. In the same way, we see car wheels as
round, even though the retinal image is oval when viewed
from an angle other than directly from the front.
(C) At other angles, the image will be seen as a trapezoid.
The edge of the door towards us looks wider than the
edge hinged with the frame.
* trapezoid: 사다리꼴 ** elliptical: 타원형의
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7
8
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
So, when someone is threatening to go to war, or trying to
convince us and mounting a huge public relations campaign
to justify it, the news media have a responsibility to
question everything.
It’s important that the media provide us with diverse and
opposing views, so we can choose the best available options.
Let’s take the example of going to war. ( ① ) War should be
a last resort, obviously, undertaken when all other options
have failed. ( ② ) They should be providing the most intense
scrutiny on our behalf, so the public can see the other side of
things. ( ③ ) Otherwise, we may be drawn into unnecessary
wars, or wars fought for reasons other than those presented
by governments and generals. ( ④ ) Most of the time, the
media fail to perform this crucial role. ( ⑤ ) Even the large,
so-called ‘liberal’ American media have admitted that they
have not always been watchdogs for the public interest, and
that their own coverage on some major issues “looks
strikingly one-sided at times.”
* scrutiny: 면밀한 조사
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Low-balling describes the technique where two
individuals arrive at an agreement and then one increases
the cost to be incurred by the other. For example, after the
consumer has agreed to purchase a car for $8,000, the
salesperson begins to add on $100 for tax and $200 for
tires. These additional costs might be thought of as a
metaphorical ‘low ball’ that the salesperson throws the
consumer. One explanation for the effectiveness of
low-balling is in terms of self-perception theory. When the
consumer agrees to purchase the product under the original
terms, that behavior might be used by the consumer to
infer his sincere interest in the product. This inferred
sincere interest in the product may enable him to endure
the increased cost. An alternative explanation is in terms
of impression management theory. If the consumer were
to withdraw from the deal after the ‘slight’ change in the
terms of agreement, he might foster the rather undesirable
impression of being an irresponsible consumer unaware of
these necessary charges.
󰀻
Low-balling is effective in sales contexts because the
consumer, by not withdrawing from the deal, tends to
(A) his purchase decision or tries to save (B) .
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① justify …… time ② justify …… face
③ cherish …… time ④ modify …… face
⑤ modify …… trouble
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
There is a difference between getting what you want and
getting what you think you want. Technology gives us more
and more of what we think we want. These days, looking at
sociable robots and digitized friends, one might assume that
what we want is to be always in touch and never alone, no
matter who or what we are in touch with. One might assume
that what we want is plenty of weak ties, the informal
networks that underpin online acquaintanceship. But if we
pay attention to the real consequences of what we think we
want, we may discover what we really want. We may want
some stillness and solitude. As an American writer once put
it, we may want to live less ‘thickly’ and wait for more
infrequent but meaningful . As we
put in our many hours of typing ― with all fingers or just
thumbs ― we may discover that we miss the human voice.
We may decide that it is fine to play chess with a robot, but
that robots are unfit for any conversation about family or
friends. A robot might have needs, but to understand desire,
one needs language and flesh. We may decide that for these
conversations, we must have a person who knows, firsthand,
what it means to be born, to have parents and a family, to
wish for love and perhaps children, and to anticipate death.
And, of course, we must not let the virtual take us away from
the real world that doesn’t go away with a power outage.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Plug In and Log On: Farewell to Loneliness
② Ethical Issues in the Online Community
③ Humans and Robots: Friends or Foes?
④ Connected yet Detached in Virtuality
⑤ Explore the Net, Go Beyond Reality
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① adventurous endeavors
② technological outbursts
③ face-to-face encounters
④ dialogs with social robots
⑤ supernatural interventions
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8
8
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
How much space do you need to be happy? Part of the
American story is that bigger is better, and with cheap credit
and tax breaks for home buyers, it’s tempting to stretch one’s
finances to build or buy a larger house. My grandpa Otto
chose a different path. (a) He didn’t want to find himself
working longer and longer hours just to pay for more space
and the stuff to fill it. He grew up in a farming community
and within a very large family, so living simply was integral
to his life philosophy.
(B)
Yet my grandpa loved his little home and was content with
what he had. Even though the house was small, it didn’t feel
cramped. As my dad said, “Everyone was happy and content.
The size of the house didn’t matter.” My grandpa taught me
that living a simple life isn’t about self-deprivation. Instead,
it’s about giving yourself the time, freedom, and money to
pursue your dreams. In many ways, I’ve modeled my life after
that of my grandpa. I learned from (b) him that simplicity
isn’t about austerity. It’s a revolution in personal growth.
(C)
In the 1950s, when my dad was a little boy, my grandpa
built a 600-square-foot cottage. (c) He put the twenty-bythirty-
foot structure on a small plot of land in Pleasant Hill.
Dad remarked, “Reusing and recycling was a necessity. In
essence, (d) he was recycling before it became ‘cool.’”
Grandpa got most of the materials for his little house from
the Oakland docks, where he was working. It took four years
to build the small cottage, and when they moved in, the roof
wasn’t even on!
(D)
My dad recalled looking up at the stars in the roofless
house as a twelve-year-old kid before falling asleep. Dad
didn’t mind living in an unfinished house. (e) He described
Pleasant Hill as “open and private. It felt like all the homes
were on ten acres.” Over the years, my dad and grandpa
noticed dramatic changes in their community. Each year
more farmland was devoured to build strip malls and
neighborhoods with larger homes. As real estate prices rose,
many of their neighbors sold their homes and lots. Soon my
grandpa had the only small house on the block, surrounded
by a sea of homes four times the size of his dwelling.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 grandpa에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 농촌 사회의 대가족 속에서 성장했다.
② 여러 가지 면에서 필자의 삶의 모델이 되었다.
③ 1950년대에 600제곱 피트의 집을 지었다.
④ 집을 짓는 데 필요한 대부분의 자재를 부두에서 구했다.
⑤ 지역 사회의 급격한 변화를 알아차리지 못했다.