1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 15
번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 들
려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
①　I know. It’s not easy to make good spaghetti.
②　Exactly. I’ll do something to reduce food waste.
③　Yes. Making a shopping list helps to save money.
④　Not at all. I’m pretty sure it won’t last for a week.
⑤　You’re right. We should have family meals more often.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll help you find an interesting topic.
② I’m glad that you came to my art presentation.
③ You’ll learn a lot about art through the presentation.
④ Don’t worry. Your presentation was not boring at all.
⑤ I have no idea why the presentation schedule was changed.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르
시오.
① 새로운 헬스 기구의 사용법을 설명하려고
② 교내 헬스장에서 지켜야 할 예절을 강조하려고
③ 체력 증진을 위한 교내 헬스장 이용을 독려하려고
④ 헬스장 이용 시 준비 운동을 할 것을 당부하려고
⑤ 교내 헬스장 보수 공사 일정을 공지하려고
4. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르
시오.
①　휴대용 컴퓨터의 손상 방지책
②　휴대용 컴퓨터 보안 관리의 필요성
③　휴대용 컴퓨터의 주변 기기 관리 요령
④　휴대용 컴퓨터 사용 증가로 인한 문제점
⑤　휴대용 컴퓨터 종류에 따른 용도와 특징
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①　학교 도서관의 시설 확충이 시급하다.
②　학생들의 도서관 이용을 장려해야 한다.
③　학교 도서관에 최신 도서를 구비해야 한다.
④　다양한 분야의 책을 균형 있게 읽어야 한다.
⑤　올바른 정보 습득을 위한 교육을 강화해야 한다.
6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 학생 - 미술 교사 ② 미술 치료사 - 학부모
③ 기자 - 미술 평론가 ④ 미술 용품점 주인 - 화가
⑤ 관람객 - 미술관 직원
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 해야 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①　샘플 상품 요청하기 ②　계약 조건 확인하기
③　시장 수요 조사하기 ④　출장 일정 점검하기
⑤　출장 보고서 작성하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 이사 가려는 이유를 고르시오.
①　직장을 옮겨서 ②　침실이 더 많이 필요해서
③　주차 공간이 협소해서 ④　난방비가 많이 나와서
⑤　자녀의 통학 거리가 멀어서
9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $800 ② $950 ③ $1,300 ④ $1,450 ⑤ $2,150
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 프로그램을
고르시오.
White Beach Aquarium: Daily Programs
Programs Time Age
Limits Price
① Penguin Feedings 2:30 p.m. None $20
② Meet the Dolphins 10:45 a.m. 7 and up $75
③ Sea Life Safari 2:30 p.m. 7 and up $75
④ Diving Class 10:45 a.m. 13 and up $50
⑤ Fun with Fur Seals 3:15 p.m. 13 and up $30
영어 영역 2
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
2 8
12. 2014 Photography Seminar에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 6월 1일부터 6일 동안 열리는 행사이다.
② 100명이 넘는 강사가 다양한 전문 분야를 다룰 예정이다.
③ 최신 사진 장비에 대한 설명이 있을 것이다.
④ 전화와 이메일을 통해 예약이 가능하다.
⑤ 사진 전공 학생에게는 할인 혜택이 주어진다.
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
①　No thanks. We have cancelled the bazaar.
②　Yes, the bazaar was successful thanks to you.
③　Sorry, but I’m too busy to volunteer at the bazaar.
④　Please help me become the director of the school bazaar.
⑤　It’ll be nice of you to ask other teachers for participation.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
①　I’m sorry to hear you have so much stress.
②　It must be difficult to work as an office worker.
③　It’s impressive that you keep challenging yourself.
④　I don’t know why you want to start a new business.
⑤　You need to spend less money at a fancy restaurant.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Benny가 운전자에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Benny: Excuse me.
① I’m looking for the entrance to the mall.
②　I’ve been waiting to take this parking space.
③ Please help me carry this grocery to my car.
④ You should turn off your blinkers after parking.
⑤ I’m afraid there’s something wrong with your tire.
[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
①　factors causing movie mistakes
②　expansion of the movie industry
③　using movies for learning history
④　strategies for casting good actors
⑤　history of commercial film-making
17. 영화 제작과 관련하여 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 예산 ② 촬영지 ③ 의상
④ 특수 효과 ⑤ 소품
이제 듣기ㆍ말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지
의 지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear C&G Waste Services,
Westwood High School is currently establishing a paper
recycling program. With the help of students and staff,
we aim to significantly reduce the amount of paper that
goes into the trash by recycling paper. We currently have
a dumpster that will hold the paper recycling, but we
need containers for individual classrooms to meet our
goal. We would like to request 20 containers. We also
need 2,000 clear trash bags in order to allow students
and staff to get the paper to the recycle dumpster. So,
we are asking your company if it will donate these items
so that we may succeed in conserving our natural
resources. Please contact me if you have any questions.
We look forward to establishing a partnership with C&G
Waste Services. We know that these types of
partnerships help us give back to the community and
enhance actions our students can take towards helping
the environment.
Sincerely,
Anna Wilson
① 빈번한 쓰레기 미수거에 대해 항의하려고
② 구입한 물품의 배송 지연에 대해 문의하려고
③ 재활용 쓰레기 수거 일정의 변경을 요청하려고
④ 지역 환경 보호 운동을 선도한 것에 대해 감사하려고
⑤ 종이 재활용 프로그램 운영에 필요한 물품 기부를 부탁하려고
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Mr. Aryeh noticed a young boy coming to school in old
worn-out shoes. Clearly ①he needed a new pair, but Mr.
Aryeh also knew that the boy’s father, a proud man, would
be humiliated and offended if ②his son were treated as a
charity case and given a pair. How does a person with moral
imagination provide a boy with shoes, while not paining his
father’s soul? During a morning recess break, Mr. Aryeh
called the boy to his office because, he said, he needed to
test ③him on his English proficiency. He asked the boy
several questions, well within the youth’s grasp. “Wonderful!”
Mr. Aryeh said when the boy answered correctly. He gave
④the youngster two notes: one to be brought to a local
shoemaker, with instructions to give the boy a good pair of
shoes, for which Mr. Aryeh would pay; the second, a note
to the boy’s father telling ⑤him about the “prize” his son
had won.
영어 영역
3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
3 8
20. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Most people get trapped in their optimistic biases, so they
tend to listen to positive feedback and ignore negative
feedback. Although this may help them come across as
confident to others, in any area of competence (e.g.,
education, business, sports or performing arts) achievement
is 10% performance and 90% preparation. Thus, the more
aware you are of your weaknesses, the better prepared you
will be. Low self-confidence may turn you into a pessimist,
but when pessimism teams up with ambition it often
produces outstanding performance. To be the very best at
anything, you will need to be your harshest critic, and that
is almost impossible when your starting point is high
self-confidence. Exceptional achievers always experience
low levels of confidence and self-confidence, but they train
hard and practice continually until they reach an acceptable
level of competence.
① Never Reveal Your Weaknesses
② Negative Comments Are Harmful
③ The Risk of Ambition Without Effort
④ The Less Confident Are More Successful
⑤ High Self-Confidence Leads to Better Achievement
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
A painter I know can’t do anything in her studio without
rock’n’roll pounding out of the speakers. Turning it on turns
on a switch inside her. The beat gets her going. It’s the
metronome for her creative life. A writer friend can only
write outside. He can’t stand the thought of being tied
indoors to his word processor while a “great day” is
unfolding outside. So he carries his coffee mug out to work
in the warmth of an open porch in his backyard. Mystically,
he now believes he is missing nothing. In the end, there is
no one ideal condition for creativity. What works for one
person is useless for another. The only criterion is this:
Make it easy on yourself. Find a working environment where
the prospect of wrestling with your muse doesn’t scare you,
doesn’t shut you down. It should make you want to be
there, and once you find it, stick with it.
* muse: (예술적) 영감을 주는 신
① 집중적인 노력은 창의력 향상의 바탕이 된다.
② 음악 감상을 통해 창조적 영감을 얻을 수 있다.
③ 창작 활동을 위해 일과 휴식의 균형이 필요하다.
④ 창조적 활동을 위한 각자에게 맞는 작업 환경이 있다.
⑤ 창조적 영감은 예상치 않은 순간에 떠오르기도 한다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Our essentially subtropical body isn’t well suited to life in
the Arctic because we don’t have the fur of polar bears or
the thick, insulating fat of sea mammals. But we can make
fur clothing, shelters to contain warmth, and weapons with
which to hunt and defend ourselves. These items are good
examples of cultural adaptation, which show how culture is
used to survive the natural world. Keep in mind, though,
that people must also survive the cultural world they inhabit,
and that is just as important. For example, if you don’t
greet your neighbors the right way, you may cause bad
feelings; in the same way, your grandfather may not
appreciate your elaborate, back-slapping handshake the way
your buddy does. So although culture does help you survive
the natural world, it also tells you how to survive the
cultural world of social interactions.
① ways to improve biological adaptation
② the use of culture for human survival
③ genetic factors to reduce human adaptability
④ the influence of instruction on human survival
⑤ the role of communication in social interactions
23. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은?
When discussing the animal kingdom, each creature belongs
to a species scale of generalists to specialists. Specialist
creatures like the koala bear can only survive on an
extremely (A) limited / variable set of conditions: diet
(eucalyptus), climate (warm), environment (trees).
Generalists, on the other hand (think mice), are able to
survive just about anywhere. They can (B) dread / withstand
heat and cold, eat your organic breakfast cereal or seeds
and berries in the wild. So, specialist species thrive only
when conditions are perfect. They serve a very specific
purpose within their particular ecosystem and are good at
navigating it. However, should those conditions change — as a
result of nature or, more commonly, an outside force —
specialist species often become (C) extinct / widespread . In
contrast, mice can move from spot to spot on the globe,
adapt to different cultures, diets and weather systems. And
most importantly, they stay alive.
(A) (B) (C)
① limited dread extinct
② limited withstand widespread
③ limited withstand extinct
④ variable withstand widespread
⑤ variable dread widespread
영어 영역 4
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
4 8
24. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
In the 1970s, when schools began allowing students to use
portable calculators, many parents ①objected. They worried
that a reliance on the machines would weaken their children’s
grasp of mathematical concepts. The fears, subsequent
studies showed, were largely ②unneeded. No longer forced
to spend a lot of time on routine calculations, many students
gained a deeper understanding of the principles underlying
their exercises. Today, the story of the calculator is often
used to support the argument that our growing dependence
on online databases is ③disadvantageous. In freeing us from
the work of remembering, it’s said, the Web allows us to
devote more time to creative thought. The pocket calculator
④relieved the pressure on our working memory, letting us
use that critical short-term store for more abstract
reasoning. The calculator, a powerful but highly specialized
tool, turned out to be an ⑤aid to our working memory.
25. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
I remember one of the smartest I.T. executives ①for whom
I ever worked strongly resisting the movement to measure
programmer productivity that was popular at the time. He was
fond of saying that the biggest problem with managing
computer programmers is that you can never tell ②whether
they are working by looking at them. Picture two programmers
working side by side. One is leaning back in his chair with his
eyes ③closed and his feet on the desk. The other is working
hard, typing code into his computer. The one with his feet up
could be thinking, and the other one may be too busy typing
④to give it enough thought. In the end, the busy typist could
well produce ten times as many lines of code as the thinker,
which contain twice as many new problems as the thinker’s.
Unfortunately, most of the productivity measurement schemes
I have encountered ⑤measuring effort or apparent activity.
They would reward him and punish his thoughtful neighbor.
26. San Miniato에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
San Miniato is a town of about 26,000 that sits atop three
hills in the Arno river valley in Tuscany, Italy. The town’s
history is deeply rooted in its function as an important stop
along the trading route between France and Italy. To protect
its historic building character, the city has set detailed
criteria for the installation of signs, plaques, and posters and
has revised its street signs. To protect views of the town
and to limit visual intrusions, the city has made strict
regulations about the construction of cell phone towers. To
accommodate visitors and tourists and not intrude on the
urban layout and design, the town has built an underground
parking lot with an elevator to the city center.
① Arno강 유역의 구릉지에 위치한다.
② 프랑스와 이탈리아의 교역로에 위치한 중요한 기착지였다.
③ 건물의 역사성 보존을 위해 간판 설치의 세부 기준을 정했다.
④ 도시 미관을 위해 이동 전화 송신탑 설치에 관한 엄격한 규정
을 마련했다.
⑤ 도심에 지하 주차장을 건설하려는 계획을 취소했다.
27. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
They have not, however, always been considered places
of beauty.
Forests have always had a role in human society. ( ① )
They have been a source of building timber and firewood, of
wild game and foods like mushrooms. ( ② ) During the
Middle Ages, especially in parts of Northern Europe, they
developed a reputation for being places of darkness and fear,
the home of evil spirits and wild beasts. ( ③ ) In Germany
you might have been attacked by werewolves or a
semi-human Wild Man, a kind of ogre covered with coarse
hair who ate children. ( ④ ) Anglo-Saxon folk tales, such
as the eighth-century Beowulf, frequently set the action in
scary forests, a legacy inherited by the stories of Tolkien,
in which friendly hobbits are extremely frightened at the
thought of having to pass through the haunted Fangorn
Forest. ( ⑤ ) Out of this medieval vision comes our word
‘savage’, derived from silva, meaning a wood.
28. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Fascinated by how easily fish slip through water, scientists
and sportswear designers alike have examined fish skins at
the molecular level to determine why they have less friction
than humans. ① Researchers were surprised to discover that
shark skin, which is rough enough to be used as sandpaper
when dried, is one of the animal skins with the least
friction. ② Shark skin is covered by small, V-shaped bumps,
made from the same material as the sharks’ teeth. ③ Shark
fin is also incorrectly perceived by some as having high
nutritional value, as well as cancer-fighting abilities. ④ The
rough surface actually reduces drag as the shark glides
through the ocean, because the bumps efficiently channel the
water away from the surface. ⑤ Copied in fabric form, a
shark skin-like system woven into a textile’s structure
gives the fabric a hydrodynamic advantage.
* hydrodynamic: 유체 역학의
영어 영역
5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
5 8
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The Trend of Blood Donation in Korea: 2005 - 2009
The graph above shows the trend of blood donation in
Korea from 2005 to 2009, in terms of the number of blood
donors and blood donation rates. ① The blood donation rate
was 5.3% in 2009, which was the highest during the given
period. ② The blood donation rate was the same both in
2005 and in 2006, and it showed constant increase
afterward. ③ The number of group blood donors was the
highest in 2005, and the number of individual blood donors
was the highest in 2009. ④ The year 2005 was the only
year when the number of group blood donors was larger
than that of individual blood donors. ⑤ The difference
between the number of group donors and that of individual
donors was the largest in 2009.
30. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Gabe Gabrielson has a nine-year-old son named Colin.
Like many nine-year-olds, Colin frequently finds
himself in disagreement with parental policies.
(A) After a few debates that left both of them feeling
frustrated, Gabe decided to change strategy, and
announced, “Okay, Colin, we’ll try it your way for three
days. But if you’re late for school any of those days,
then we go back to the old system.”
(B) For example, he protested Gabe’s policy that he get
fully dressed before coming down to breakfast. Gabe
didn’t particularly care what Colin wore at the breakfast
table, but he worried that if Colin didn’t dress first,
he’d wind up late for school. “But I’m more comfortable
in my pajamas!” Colin argued.
(C) Colin, amazed by the change in response, aced the trial
run. He wore his pajamas and stayed punctual. As a
result, the new practice stuck, and both sides are
happier with the outcome.
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
31. Bikes4Hope Support Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하지 않는 것은?
BIKES4HOPE SUPPORT NIGHT
Bikes4Hope is a non-profit organization dedicated to
sending bicycles to the children in remote villages in
Africa by collecting unwanted and old bicycles. You’re
invited to our fundraising event.
DATE & TIME
• Thursday March 27th, 2014; 7 p.m. - 11 p.m.
PERFORMERS
• Musicians: Eli John, Brett Wilson, Green Smith
• Magicians: Fun Brothers, Risky Button, Flying People
TICKETS
• Pre-sale at www.bikes4hope.org: $20
• On the door on the night: $25
• Children accompanied by an adult: Free
Thanks for your support and we truly hope to see
you on Thursday night!
① 아프리카로 자전거를 보내기 위한 기금 마련 행사이다.
② 3월 27일에 4시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 음악 공연과 마술 공연이 있다.
④ 입장권은 당일 현장에서만 판매한다.
⑤ 어른을 동반한 어린이는 무료로 입장한다.
32. 다음 글에 드러난 Hogan의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Hogan had already been walking for hours along the sand
track. He had drunk the last remaining drop of water an
hour before. His feet came down regularly one in front of
the other, sending up little clouds of dust. The dunes
stretched as far as the eye could see, motionless, on either
side of the track. Nothing was left but the dazzling sand
with its millions of tiny broken grains, and dry stones that
crumbled away in layers. No trucks passed. No aircraft ever
appeared in the immense sky. The nothingness was so great
that it could not even be called solitude any longer. It was
like floating on the ocean, thousands of miles from land,
while tiny waves sweep forward in ripples.
① satisfied and grateful ② relaxed and refreshed
③ hopeless and abandoned ④ excited and anticipating
⑤ ashamed and embarrassed
영어 영역 6
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
6 8
[33 ~ 37] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. Languages evolve differences because different groups of
people independently develop different words and different
pronunciations over the course of time. But the question
remains why those diverged languages don’t merge again
when formerly separated people spread out and re-contact
each other at speech boundaries. For instance, at the modern
boundary between Germany and Poland, there are Polish
villages near German villages, but the villagers still speak a
local variety of either German or of Polish, rather than a
mix of German and Polish. Why is that so? Probably the
main disadvantage of speaking a mixed language involves a
basic function of human language: as soon as you start to
speak to someone else, your language serves as an instantly
recognizable badge of your . It’s much
easier for wartime spies to wear the enemy’s uniform than
to imitate convincingly the enemy’s language and
pronunciation. People who speak your language are your
people, whereas someone speaking a different language is
apt to be regarded as a potentially dangerous stranger.
① artistic taste
② group identity
③ intellectual power
④ personal character
⑤ educational background
34. Our craving for is illustrated by a
study of religious Israeli women, carried out by
anthropologists Richard Sosis and W. Penn Handwerker.
During the 2006 Lebanon War the town of Tzfat and its
environs in the Galilee region of northern Israel were hit by
dozens of rockets daily. Although siren warnings alerted
Tzfat residents to protect their own lives by taking refuge
in bomb shelters, they could do nothing to protect their
houses. Realistically, that threat from the rockets was
unpredictable and uncontrollable. Nevertheless, about
two-thirds of the women interviewed by Sosis and
Handwerker recited psalms every day to cope with the
stress of the rocket attacks. When they were asked why
they did so, a common reply was that they felt compelled
“to do something” as opposed to doing nothing at all.
Although reciting psalms does not actually deflect rockets, it
did provide the women with a sense of control as they took
action in their own way. * deflect: 빗나가게 하다
① knowledge of the future
② relief from feeling helpless
③ exploring the unknown world
④ being accepted by our peers
⑤ freedom from social conventions
35. Risk management professionals look in the past for
information on the so-called worst-case scenario and use it
to estimate future risks ―this method is called “stress
testing.” They take the worst historical recession, the worst
war, or the worst point in unemployment as an exact estimate
for the worst future outcome. But they never notice the
following inconsistency: this so-called worst-case event,
when it happened, exceeded the worst case at the time. I
have called this mental defect the Lucretius problem, after the
Latin poetic philosopher who wrote that the fool believes that
the tallest mountain in the world will be equal to the tallest
one he has observed. The same can be seen in the Fukushima
nuclear reactor, which experienced a huge failure in 2011
when a tsunami struck. It had been built to endure the worst
past historical earthquake, with the builders not imagining
much worse —and not thinking that the worst past event had
to be a surprise, as it . [3점]
① had no precedent
② matched their prediction
③ led to better preparation
④ repeated itself over time
⑤ came earlier than expected
36. Think of how you developed your style of using the
brakes on your car. As you were mastering the skill of
taking curves, you gradually learned when to let go of the
accelerator and when and how hard to use the brakes.
Curves differ, and the variability you experienced while
learning ensures that you are now ready to brake at the
right time and strength for any curve you encounter. The
conditions for learning this skill are ideal, because you
receive immediate and unambiguous feedback every time you
go around a bend: the mild reward of a comfortable turn or
the mild punishment of some difficulty in handling the car if
you brake either too hard or not quite hard enough. The
situations that face a harbor pilot maneuvering large ships
are no less regular, but skill is much more difficult to
acquire by sheer experience because of the long delay
between actions and their noticeable outcomes. Whether
professionals have a chance to develop intuitive expertise
depends essentially on , as
well as on sufficient opportunity to practice. [3점]
① the ability to control emotions
② the assistance from instructors
③ the discovery of hidden talents
④ the desire to beat the opponents
⑤ the quality and speed of feedback
영어 영역
7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
7 8
37. The tight bonds we form with our tools go both ways.
Even as our technologies become extensions of ourselves,
we become extensions of our technologies. When the
carpenter takes his hammer into his hand, he can use that
hand to do only what a hammer can do. The hand becomes
an implement for pounding and pulling nails. When the
soldier puts the binoculars to his eyes, he can see only
what the lenses allow him to see. His field of view
lengthens, but he becomes blind to what’s nearby.
Nietzsche’s experience with his typewriter provides a
particularly good illustration of the way __________________.
Not only did the philosopher come to imagine that his
typewriter was “a thing like me”; he also sensed that he
was becoming a thing like it, that his typewriter was
shaping his thoughts. [3점]
① technologies exert their influence on us
② tools are refined and developed
③ we overcome our weaknesses
④ one invention builds on another
⑤ we put our passion into meaningful purposes
[38 ~ 39] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
38. Indeed, confusing people a little bit is beneficial ― it is
good for you and good for them. For example, imagine
someone extremely punctual who comes home at exactly six
o’clock every day for fifteen years. You can use his arrival
to set your watch. The fellow will cause his family anxiety
if he is barely a few minutes late. Someone with a slightly
more (A) schedule, with, say, a half-hour variation,
won’t do so. For similar reasons, stability is not good for the
economy: firms become very weak during long periods of
steady success without failure, and hidden vulnerabilities
accumulate silently under the surface ―so delaying crises is
not a very good idea. Likewise, (B) of ‘ups and downs’
in the market causes hidden risks to accumulate quietly. The
longer one goes without a market trauma, the worse the
damage when a real crisis occurs.
* vulnerability: 취약성
(A) (B)
① restricted frequency
② unpredictable expectation
③ unpredictable absence
④ consistent duration
⑤ consistent experience
39. My suggestion is to understand and make use of the
changes in people’s strengths and weaknesses as they grow
older. We can say that useful attributes tending to decrease
with age include ambition, desire to compete, physical
strength and endurance, and capacity for sustained mental
concentration. (A) , useful attributes tending to
increase with age include experience of one’s field,
understanding of people and relationships, and ability to help
other people without one’s own ego getting in the way.
These shifts in strengths result in many older workers
choosing to devote more of their efforts to supervising,
administering, advising, and teaching. (B) , my farmer
friends in their 80s spend less time on horseback and on
tractors, more time making strategic decisions about the
business of farming; my older lawyer friends spend less
time in court, more time mentoring younger lawyers.
(A) (B)
① In other words For instance
② In other words Instead
③ Additionally In contrast
④ Conversely In contrast
⑤ Conversely For instance
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Plants generate hundreds of compounds that they use
to protect themselves from being overconsumed by
insects and animals. While some plants use these
compounds to reduce all foraging, most plants tolerate, or
even enjoy, about an 18 percent foraging rate (10 to 25
percent depending on the plant) before they begin to
initiate high levels of protective compounds. Many of the
actions of animals when they eat plants (termed
“herbivory”) are necessary for both plant and ecosystem
health. Herbivory alters the density, composition, and
health of plant communities through eating plants,
dispersing seeds, and defecation. Some plants produce an
initial series of leaves designed to be eaten, and more
luxurious growth only occurs once that has happened. For
many plants, metabolism and respiration are all stimulated
by animal and insect feeding. It is only after foraging
rises above a certain level that many plant defensive
compounds are produced in quantity or come into play.
* foraging: (동물에 의한) 피식(被食) ** defecation: 배변

Until foraging rate reaches a certain point, many plants
tend to (A) the production of high-level defensive
compounds for the (B) that foraging brings to them.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① suspend prosperity ② suspend competition
③ extend prosperity ④ extend threat
⑤ stimulate competition
영어 영역 8
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
8 8
[41 ∼ 43] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Allen Sherman, the comic songwriter best known for
“Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah” was once in the middle of
an intense conversation with his wife when his young
son entered to show off a drawing he had just finished.
The childish drawing was quickly dismissed by Sherman,
who was annoyed at having (a) his conversation
interrupted. The boy, hurt by his father’s rejection of
the picture, threw it down on the floor, rushed up to his
room, and slammed the door.
(B)
The embarrassed boy ran up to (b) his room, slammed
the door, and refused to come down to the party. But a
little later his mother came up to fetch him. When she
brought him downstairs, he saw his grandmother proudly
walking around the room with a large bowl filled with a
variety of beautiful fruits and, in the middle, the polished
football he had brought home. When a guest asked his
grandmother to explain what a football was doing in the
middle of her fruit bowl, she told (c) him about the gift
from her grandson and added, “From a child is beautiful,
anything.”
(C)
Sherman took the football home, polished it till it
shone, and left it for his grandmother. His mother saw
the football first, and became upset with him for leaving
his toys around. When (d) he explained that it was for
his grandmother’s party, his mother burst into laughter:
“A football for the party? Don’t you understand your own
grandma? Not a football, fruit bowl. Grandma needs a
fruit bowl for the party.”
(D)
The slamming door reminded the now embarrassed
Sherman of a door that he had slammed twenty-five
years earlier. One morning he had heard his
Yiddish-speaking grandmother announce that she needed
a “football” for a large party she would be hosting that
evening. Although the young Sherman wondered why his
grandmother needed a football, he was determined to
obtain one for her. He went around his neighborhood and
finally found one boy, a bully who punched (e) him in
the nose before agreeing to give over his football in
exchange for Sherman’s best toys.
* Yiddish: 독일어ㆍ히브리어 등의 혼성 언어
41. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
42. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
43. 위 글의 Allen Sherman에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 어머니가 부르러 온 후에야 파티에 참석했다.
② 과일 그릇 한가운데 놓여 있는 축구공을 보았다.
③ 할머니에게 드릴 축구공을 깨끗이 닦았다.
④ 축구공을 발견한 어머니로부터 칭찬을 들었다.
⑤ 가장 좋은 장난감들을 주고 축구공을 얻었다.
[44 ∼ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
In the mid-1970s some scientists observed employees
of two manufacturing plants in the United States. One
plant was located in a large metropolitan area, the other
in a rural community with a population of three
thousand. On average, the employees had worked at their
respective plants for twenty years. Sadly, both plants
were scheduled to shut down, and all workers were
about to lose their jobs.
For months, the men came to work knowing that in
only a few weeks they would be unemployed.
Anticipating the loss of their workplace was stressful.
The anxiety was triggered to a large extent by the
uncertainty of what lay ahead. How would they cope
with unemployment? Would they find another job?
Scientists who followed these workers found that the
employees experienced more days of illness before the
plants were shut than during the weeks of unemployment
that followed. The anxiety induced by anticipating the
loss of their jobs damaged their health and well-being.
Ironically, once unemployed, the workers became
healthier. It’s because the uncertainty of how life would
be without a job was . Anxiety was reduced,
and attention turned to finding a new job, rather than
worrying aimlessly about what might be.
44. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Focus Your Energy on Seizing an Opportunity
② Turn Your Attention to the Unemployed
③ Work Stress: How You Can Beat It
④ Enduring Uncertainty Is a Sign of Maturity
⑤ Anticipating Disaster Is Worse Than Disaster
45. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① removed ② renewed
③ visualized ④ introduced
⑤ underestimated

1
8
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, I think we should.
② We enjoyed a great party.
③ I wonder why they cancelled it.
④ Yes, we can attend the meeting.
⑤ No, I don’t have time for dinner.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Great. Now I can go on a vacation.
② Of course. I did everything I could do.
③ Thank you. I’ll delete the files right away.
④ I’m sorry. I’ll finish it as soon as possible.
⑤ Don’t apologize. I’m sure you’ll get better soon.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 원예 동아리 가입을 권유하려고
② 티셔츠 수령 방법을 안내하려고
③ 채소 재배 방법을 설명하려고
④ 회장 후보 자격을 공지하려고
⑤ 회비 납부를 요청하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 독서가 글쓰기에 미치는 영향
② 토론 능력 향상을 위한 방법
③ 일기를 쓸 때의 유의 사항
④ 자유 토론 방식의 장점
⑤ 잘못된 상식의 위험성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 소설가 － 독자 ② 면접관 － 구직자
③ 사진작가 － 패션모델 ④ 잡지 기자 － 영화배우
⑤ 관광 가이드 － 여행객
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 요리책 소개하기 ② 조리사 추천하기
③ 요리 수업 신청하기 ④ 조리 기구 준비하기
⑤ 요리 웹사이트 알려 주기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 변경된 시간에 배드민턴 연습을 할 수
없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 댄스 연습을 해야 해서
② 코치를 구할 수 없어서
③ 체육관이 공사 중이어서
④ 학교 행사에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 도서관 아르바이트를 해야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $300 ② $360 ③ $450 ④ $500 ⑤ $540
10. 대화를 듣고, 학부모 교사 회의에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지
않은 것을 고르시오.
① 유인물 복사 ② 컴퓨터 설치 ③ 간식 구입
④ 강당 청소 ⑤ 현수막 걸기
11. summer camp에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① 수영장 시설을 갖추고 있다.
② 수학과 과학 프로그램을 제공한다.
③ 캠프 기간은 5일이다.
④ 등록비는 무료이다.
⑤ 온라인 신청만 가능하다.
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 관람할 영화를
고르시오. [3점]
Movie Information
Title Genre 3D Movie Time Age Limit
① A Animation × 10:30 a.m. All ages
② B Action ○ 11:00 a.m. Over 19
③ C SF ○ 2:30 p.m. Over 15
④ D Comedy × 5:00 p.m. All ages
⑤ E Thriller ○ 5:30 p.m. Over 15
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Okay. I’ll go find another one soon.
② Never mind. I’ll give you my advice.
③ But didn’t you already contact him last year?
④ I’m sure you’ll do a great job at the program.
⑤ Then can you send them to me by text message?
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① I’d like to publish a book.
② I’ll deliver them on schedule.
③ I’d prefer to get them by mail.
④ I’ll be right back and buy them.
⑤ I’ll revise the review right away.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Helen이 손님에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Helen:
① Don’t worry. I will hold the shirt for you.
② I’m sorry, but we don’t sell products on credit.
③ You can visit the lost and found for your wallet.
④ I apologize. We don’t have anything in your size.
⑤ Let me show you a different type of shirt instead.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how to become organized
② the importance of donation
③ factors that affect personality
④ why we should collect things
⑤ problems of throwing things away
17. 언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① papers ② clock ③ toys
④ lamp ⑤ flower vase
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Ms. Mattie,
Thank you very much for offering me the research
engineer position at ABC Company. However, after
a great deal of thought, I have decided not to accept
the position. Your company has an excellent reputation
as a research institution and has many aspects that
are very attractive to me. Unfortunately, I cannot
accept your offer because I have decided to pursue
another opportunity. Once again, thank you for your
consideration.
Very truly yours,
Christine Mahoe
① 입사 제안을 거절하려고
② 계약 조건을 확인하려고
③ 업무 조정을 요청하려고
④ 입사 시험 결과를 문의하려고
⑤ 입사 지원 절차를 알아보려고
19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Obviously, one of the judgments the public has of us is
whether or not our telephone service is good. Technically, if
they get their calls through, efficiently and promptly, they
get what they want. That, however, is not all they want.
They want to have the service rendered to them in a manner
that pleases them; they want not only efficiency but courtesy
and consideration; and they are in a position to get what
they want. They are in the driver’s seat; they are paying the
bills; and an understanding of that fact is a real and
fundamental basis of public relations. In order, therefore, for
a great company to satisfactorily serve the public, it must
have a philosophy and a method of doing business which
will allow and insure that its people serve the public
efficiently and in a pleasing manner.
① 성공적인 기업 경영을 위해 사원 복지 향상에 힘써야 한다.
② 효율적이면서 고객을 만족시키는 서비스를 제공해야 한다.
③ 기업 이익의 일정 부분을 사회에 환원해야 한다.
④ 공공 예절을 지키며 휴대 전화를 사용해야 한다.
⑤ 고객의 요구에 맞는 신제품을 개발해야 한다.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
On the path to excellence, some obstacles may initially
seem overwhelming. Every performer experiences this feeling,
even the greatest performers in the world. If you believe
that the obstacles are too great to overcome, you will prove
yourself right even when you are wrong. Most seemingly
impossible obstacles can be overcome by seeing possibilities,
focusing on what is within your control, taking the first
step, and then focusing on the next step and the next step
after that. If your commitment becomes weak, remember
your dream and why it is important to you, find simple
joys in your daily pursuits, rejoice in the little victories or
small steps forward, and embrace the process of ongoing
learning. With a positive perspective and persistence, you
will get through and find a way through all obstacles.
① 시작이 좋아야 큰 성공을 거둘 수 있다.
② 꿈을 이루기 위해 현실적인 목표를 세워야 한다.
③ 긍정적 시각과 끈기가 있으면 난관을 극복할 수 있다.
④ 갈등을 유발하지 않으려면 감정의 조절이 필요하다.
⑤ 지속적인 학습을 위해서는 동기부여가 필요하다.
21. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
For many years now, mediated entertainment such as TV
and film has been able to stimulate our optical and auditory
senses with sights and sounds. Some forms of new media,
however, even engage our senses of touch and smell. The
view the wearer of some special device sees is projected on
the screen behind him. Wearers become immersed in the
computerized scene and use the gloves to pick up and
move simulated objects. Many virtual reality games and
rides now allow audiences and players to feel sensations of
motion and touch. New media may also include aromas,
such as Disney’s “Soaring Over California” attraction at the
California Adventure theme park, where audiences smell
orange orchards and pine forests while enjoying a simulated
hang-gliding experience across the countryside. Makers of
emerging forms of entertainment will likely continue to
experiment with ways they can simulate and manipulate
reality by stimulating our senses.
① TV and Film: Blessing or Curse?
② How We Operate an Audio System
③ Seeing Is More Important Than Touching
④ “Soaring Over California,” a Theme Park Adventure
⑤ New Mediated Entertainment: Stimulate More Senses!
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Recently, researchers have suggested that the purpose of
laughter is not just to communicate that one is in a playful
state, but to actually induce this state in others as well.
According to this view, the peculiar sounds of laughter have
a direct effect on the listener, inducing positive emotional
arousal that mirrors the emotional state of the laugher,
perhaps by activating certain specialized brain circuits. In this
way, laughter may serve an important biosocial function of
coupling together the positive emotions of members of a
group and thereby coordinating their activities. This would
explain why laughter is so infectious; when we hear someone
laughing, it is almost impossible not to feel cheerful and
begin laughing too.
① effects of laughter on others
② benefits of activating brain circuits
③ strategies for coordinating activities
④ negative aspects of emotional reactions
⑤ importance of grouping in communication
23. NAS Bird Watching Adventure에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
nAS Bird Watching Adventure
NAS National Wildlife Refuge, Houston
Sunday, July 20, 2014, 8:00 － 18:00
$80 per person
The tour starts at the NAS Forest & Trail
Headquarters at 8:00 am. Once we arrive at the
refuge at about 10:00 am, we will begin our
six-hour hike, searching for birds and learning
about the plants and animals of the refuge.
∙What to expect: The hike covers 3 to 4 miles
and includes moderately difficult terrain.
∙What’s provided: Transportation, lunch, and
expert guides.
∙What to bring: Comfortable shoes, long pants,
and sunblock.
For more information, visit www.wls.gov/nasforest.
① NAS Forest & Trail Headquarters에서 오전 8시에 시작된다.
② 야생 생물 보호 구역의 동식물에 관해서 배울 수 있다.
③ 도보 여행의 거리는 3～4 마일이다.
④ 교통편은 제공하지만 점심은 제공하지 않는다.
⑤ 편한 신발, 긴 바지, 자외선 차단제를 가져와야 한다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
24. Swan Lake에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
SWAN LAKE
July 3 (Thu.) - 4 (Fri.), 2014, at the State Theater
Time: Thu. 8:00 pm / Fri. 7:00 pm
Prices: A Seats - $120 / B Seats - $90
Running Time: 2 hours
Minimum Age: Children under 7 will not be admitted.
The ballet is performed to the live music of the
State Theater Orchestra.
∙20% Early Purchase Discount until May 31
- To receive this discount, you must purchase your
tickets from our website at www.statetheater.com.
∙Phone Reservations: 887-885-7909
- Business hours: 09:00 － 18:00 (7 days a week)
∙Cancellation Policy
- On the day of performance: No refund
- 1～5 days before the performance: 30% cancellation fee
① 공연 시간은 세 시간 동안이다.
② 녹음된 음악에 맞춰 발레가 공연된다.
③ 웹사이트에서 5월 31일까지 티켓을 구매하면 할인 혜택이 있다.
④ 전화 예매는 평일에만 가능하다.
⑤ 공연 당일에 취소해도 환불받을 수 있다.
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentage of U.S. advertising
spending by media and consumer time spent using each type
of media in 2011. ① In the case of TV, both advertising
spending and consumer time spent took up the largest
proportion with 43% and 40%, respectively. ② Print
ranked second in advertising spending, whereas it ranked
last in consumer time spent. ③ Web accounted for the third
largest proportion in both advertising spending and
consumer time spent. ④ As for the percentage gap between
advertising spending and consumer time spent, Radio
showed the smallest gap. ⑤ The percentage gap between
advertising spending and consumer time spent was larger in
Web than in Mobile.
26. Tammy Rahr에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
During her childhood years, the artist Tammy Rahr spent
a lot of time outdoors making things from flowers and dirt.
Then Tammy and her family moved from the woodlands of
New York State to an urban city outside of Los Angeles,
California. The experience made her more aware of what was
going on in the world. After returning to New York State
with her family, Tammy faced another lesson in growing up.
A gifted student, she was sent to college when she was just
14. Tammy was able to earn her high school diploma and
some college credit before trying her hand at a number of
different jobs. Eventually, she moved to Santa Fe, New Mexico,
and studied at the Institute of American Indian Arts. After
graduating from the institute, she remained active with it and
the museum there.
① 어린 시절에 꽃과 흙으로 무언가를 만들면서 많은 시간을 보냈다.
② New York 주에서 California로 이사했다.
③ 가족과 함께 New York 주로 되돌아갔다.
④ 고등학교 졸업장을 받지 못했다.
⑤ Institute of American Indian Arts에서 공부했다.
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
In the twentieth century, advances in technology, from
refrigeration to sophisticated ovens to air transportation
① that carries fresh ingredients around the world, contributed
immeasurably to baking and pastry making. At the beginning
of the twenty-first century, the popularity of fine breads and
pastries ② are growing even faster than new chefs can be
trained. Interestingly enough, many of the technological advances
in bread making have sparked a reaction among bakers and
consumers ③ alike. They are looking to reclaim some of the
flavors of old-fashioned breads that ④ were lost as baking
became more industrialized and baked goods became more
refined, standardized, and ― some would say ― flavorless.
Bakers are researching methods for ⑤ producing the handmade
sourdough breads of the past, and they are experimenting
with specialty flours in their search for flavor.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
Although children watch television at various times, the
programming that they view alone tends to be specifically
aimed at children. In the United States particularly, most of
the advertising during this segment consists of ads for food,
particularly sugared food. During the run-up to Christmas,
(A) increasing / decreasing numbers of ads concern toys and
games. Such practices are believed to put pressure on parents
to yield to what the media have dubbed “pester power.”
This has led to calls for legislation to (B) promote / regulate
advertising in Europe and the United States. Indeed, the
Swedish government has outlawed television advertising of
products aimed at children under 12, and recently in the
United States, 50 psychologists (C) rejected / signed a petition
calling for a ban on the advertising of children’s goods.
* pester power: 부모에게 떼를 써서 물건을 구매하게 하는 힘
** petition: 탄원(서)
(A) (B) (C)
① increasing …… promote …… rejected
② increasing …… regulate …… signed
③ increasing …… regulate …… rejected
④ decreasing …… promote …… signed
⑤ decreasing …… regulate …… signed
29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Dave Butcher, director of training for Sea World in
Florida, showed me more than I’d imagined possible. His sea
lions worked for social rewards as well as fish. Consequently,
he did not have to keep his sea lions hungry in order to make
① them perform. During and after the day’s performances,
the sea lions could have all the fish ② they wanted. One result
was that ③ they were not irritable, as any hungry animal
might be. The sea lions were friendly to those humans they
knew and enjoyed being with ④ them. I was surprised to see
trainers on their lunch hour sunbathing in a pile with their
sea lions. Another result of stopping food deprivation was
that these sea lions grew and grew! In fact, ⑤ they became
bigger than most trained sea lions in the past, which weren’t
given enough food.
[30～32] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
30. The true champion recognizes that excellence often flows
most smoothly from , a fact that can get lost in
these high-tech days. I used to train with a world-class
runner who was constantly hooking himself up to pulse
meters and pace keepers. He spent hours collecting data that
he thought would help him improve. In fact, a good 25
percent of his athletic time was devoted to externals other
than working out. Sports became so complex for him that he
forgot how to enjoy himself. Contrast his approach with that
of the late Abebe Bikila, the Ethiopian who won the 1960
Olympic Marathon running barefoot. High-tech clothing and
digital watches were not part of his world. Abebe Bikila
simply ran. Many times in running, and in other areas of
life, less is more. [3점]
① talent ② patience ③ simplicity
④ generosity ⑤ confidence
31. The origins of contemporary Western thought can be
traced back to the golden age of ancient Greece, when Greek
thinkers laid the foundations for modern Western politics,
philosophy, science, and law. Their novel approach was to
pursue rational inquiry through adversarial discussion: The
best way to evaluate one set of ideas, they decided, was
by . In the
political sphere, the result was democracy, in which
supporters of rival policies vied for rhetorical supremacy; in
philosophy, it led to reasoned arguments and dialogues about
the nature of the world; in science, it prompted the
construction of competing theories to try to explain natural
phenomena; in the field of law, the result was the adversarial
legal system. This approach is the foundation for the modern
Western way of life, in which politics, commerce, science, and
law are all rooted in orderly competition. [3점]
* adversarial: 대립 관계의
** vie: 다투다, 경쟁하다
① forcing it upon the opponents
② pursuing a conventional standard
③ testing it against another set of ideas
④ promoting a consensus among supporters
⑤ rejecting competing theories without discussion
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
32. I would like to compare the shift from analog to
digital film-making to the shift from fresco and tempera
to oil painting in the early Renaissance. A painter making
a fresco has limited time before the paint dries, and once
it has dried, no further changes to the image are possible.
Similarly, a traditional filmmaker has limited means of
modifying images once they are recorded on film.
Medieval tempera painting can be compared to the
practice of special effects during the analog period of
cinema. A painter working with tempera could modify
and rework the image, but the process was painstaking
and slow. The switch to oils greatly liberated painters by
allowing them to quickly create much larger compositions
as well as to modify them as long as necessary. Similarly,
,
digital technology redefines what can be done with
cinema. [3점]
① by equating oil painting with analog film-making
② by allowing a filmmaker to treat a film image as an
oil painting
③ with the shift from oil painting styles to fresco ones
in making films
④ by integrating fresco painting techniques into the
film-making process
⑤ with the introduction of tempera painting methods to
cinematic special effects
33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
When there is a discrepancy between the verbal message
and the nonverbal message, the latter typically weighs more
in forming a judgment. (A) , a friend might react
to a plan for dinner with a comment like “that’s good,” but
with little vocal enthusiasm and a muted facial expression.
In spite of the verbal comment, the lack of expressive
enthusiasm suggests that the plan isn’t viewed very
positively. In such a case, the purpose of the positive
comment might be to avoid a disagreement and support the
friend, but the lack of a positive expression unintentionally
leaks a more candid, negative reaction to the plan. Of
course, the muted expressive display might also be strategic
and intentional. (B) , the nonverbal message is
deliberate, but designed to let the partner know one’s candid
reaction indirectly. It is then the partner’s responsibility to
interpret the nonverbal message and make some adjustment
in the plan.
(A) (B)
① In addition …… Instead
② In addition …… However
③ In contrast …… That is
④ For example …… However
⑤ For example …… That is
34. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Early one night in 1973 in my old and cheap apartment
in Bangor, Maine, I got a phone call from my agent, Bill,
who was helping me publish my first novel. “Are you
sitting down?” Bill asked. “No,” I said. “Do I need to?”
“You might,” he said. “The publication rights for your
book were sold for four hundred thousand dollars!” I was
completely speechless. That amount of money was beyond
my wildest expectations. I was sure I hadn’t heard him
right. I couldn’t have. I asked, “Did you say it went for
forty thousand dollars?” Bill said it again as clearly as he
could, “Four hundred thousand dollars. Congratulations,
Steve.” “Are you sure, Bill?” I said in disbelief. He said he
was. We talked for another half an hour, but I don’t
remember a single word of what we said.
① angry ② jealous
③ astonished ④ sympathetic
⑤ disappointed
[35～36] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
35. Music can convey the scope of a film, effectively
communicating whether the motion picture is an epic drama
or a story that exists on a more personal scale. Music can
convey the quality and size of a space. ① For example, in
Alien and Olivier’s Hamlet, the music serves at times to make
small and/or artificial spaces seem more grand and to
enhance the sense of realism. ② In addition, music can
establish a narrative’s placement in time. ③ Music for motion
pictures often serves to authenticate the era or to provide a
sense of nostalgia. ④ Music has traditionally been classified
by musical instruments. ⑤ Examples of the former would
include Amadeus and Immortal Beloved, while a sense of
nostalgia is communicated through the music selected for
films such as American Graffiti and The Big Chill.
36. It is difficult to appreciate what a temperature of
20,000,000℃ means. ① If the solar surface, not the center,
were as hot as this, the radiation emitted into space would
be so great that the whole Earth would be vaporized within
a few minutes. ② Indeed, this is just what would happen if
some cosmic giant were to peel off the outer layers of the
Sun like skinning an orange, for the tremendously hot inner
regions would then be exposed. ③ It is believed that the
brightness of the Sun can be predicted theoretically.
④ Fortunately, no such circumstance is possible, and the
outer layers of the Sun provide a sort of blanket that protects
us from its inner fires. ⑤ Yet in spite of these blanketing
layers, some energy must leak through from the Sun’s center
to its outer regions, and this leakage is of just the right
amount to compensate for the radiation emitted by the
surface into surrounding space.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
[37～38] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
37.
Mom and Dad went to dinner at a nice restaurant. On
that first night to myself, Dad entrusted me with his
movie projector and all the reels of film.
(A) Then I can play the film backward and watch the cat fly
down to the floor and see all the splashes of ice cream
slurp themselves back into the dish. I made Simon jump in
and out several times before I watched the rest of the film.
(B) He said I could do everything myself that night. So I
set up the screen at one end of the living room. I turned
on the projector, turned off the light, put the bowl of
popcorn in my lap, and settled in to watch the film
labeled HATTIE-1951.
(C) It’s one of my favorites because my third birthday party
is on it and I can watch our old cat Simon jump up on
the dining room table and land in a dish of ice cream.
* slurp: 후루룩 소리를 내다
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
38.
Since group performance in problem solving is superior to
even the individual work of the most expert group members,
it should not be surprising that students learn better when
they cooperate. However, there is one issue that needs further
consideration.
(A) In addition to that benefit, helping lower-ability students
often pulls higher-ability students to a more sophisticated
understanding of the material. The cliché that teachers
learn as much as their pupils is certainly true.
(B) Not quite. Knowledge, happily, is not a zero-sum product.
Higher-ability students can reinforce their own knowledge
by teaching those with lower ability.
(C) Specifically, the technique of having students help one
another raises the question of whether students with lower
ability are being helped at the expense of those with
higher ability. Is this true?
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
But no one, even your child, is exactly like you.
Parents often believe that they are providing help to their
children when they constantly correct and criticize them,
assuming that they will grow from these remarks. But ask
yourself: Do you like being corrected? Do you grow when
you are constantly criticized? ( ① ) In truth, we tend to
stay the same when we are criticized. ( ② ) We want to
defend what we have done, and our innate stubbornness
refuses to permit us to accept the criticism we are receiving.
( ③ ) Behind virtually all criticism is the sentence “If only
you were more like me, and living life as I see it, you
would be a lot better off.” ( ④ ) Praise your children for
attempting a task, even if it was unsuccessful, and for
taking risks. ( ⑤ ) Create an environment in which your
children know that you are with them in their efforts, rather
than looking to criticize them.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
An ant turns right, left, and moves ahead over a sandy
hill. How can we explain the complexity of the path it
chose? We can think up a sophisticated program in the
ant’s brain, but it does not work. What we have
overlooked is the ant’s environment. The ant may be
following a simple rule: get out of the sun and back to the
nest. Complex behavior does not imply complex mental
strategies. The same holds for humans. The apparent
complexity of a man’s behavior over time is largely a
reflection of the complexity of the environment in which
he finds himself. People adapt to their environments much
as gelatin does; if you wish to know what form it will
have when it solidifies, study the shape of the mold that
holds the gelatin. To understand behavior, one has to look
at both the mind and the environment.
* gelatin: 젤라틴, 정제한 아교
󰀻
Although we tend to (A) complex behavior with
complex mental operations, (B) factors need to be
considered as well for a better understanding of such
behavior.
(A) (B)
① associate …… genetic
② associate …… environmental
③ identify …… psychological
④ replace …… psychological
⑤ replace …… environmental
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
When someone asks us, “How does that work?” or
“Why does that happen?” we tend to answer the question
directly if we know the answer. After all, it is efficient.
Another person asks a question; we provide the answer to
the question. It is usually a win-win. The problem with
this is that the direct approach can have an unintended
consequence: the loss of confidence. Although the
question wanted for an explanation, what the asker
received was a statement of fact. Why does oil float on
top of water in a glass? Relative density. What causes
climate change? Increased CO2 in the atmosphere. Why
does the ocean have tides? The moon. Giving direct,
accurate, and factual answers may seem to solve the
problem from the perspective of the answerer. But in
reality, it can shut the asker down. A statement of fact
with no other context puts the burden on the asker to take
the next step. If the asker isn’t familiar with relative
density or CO2, he or she is likely to move on rather than
ask a follow-up question or probe for related ideas. Any
hope of becoming a customer of that idea is lost. This is
a failure in the form of a lost opportunity. Although direct
answers are often needed and well-placed, they do not
work universally. A skilled explainer learns to see the
intent behind the question and formulate an answer that
focuses on understanding instead of .
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Give Simpler Answers!
② How Can We Ask Questions Properly?
③ Scientific Facts: What the Asker Needs
④ Accurate Answers: A Mirror of Knowledge
⑤ Why Is Giving Direct Answers Problematic?
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① efficiency ② diversity ③ fluency
④ privacy ⑤ honesty
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
It was my last football game as a college player. I made
the final tackle and we won. As people chanted my
name, (a) I was carried off the field on the shoulders of
my teammates. Although I wasn’t a great student or a
great football player, I ended up not only graduating from
my dream university but becoming a hero of the team.
People keep asking me how I did it. Here is my story.
(B)
It was so hard to break out of the box, but (b) I began
to feel an urgent need for a change. I signed up for the
Army and went to the Vietnam War. A lot of people were
worried, but I said, “Well, I’m going to get out of my box
by deciding what to do myself instead of having someone
else tell (c) me what to do.” With that one crucial shift in
thinking, my whole attitude changed. I began to dream of
going to one of the best universities in the country and
playing football.
(C)
I was born into a large poor family in Chicago. As a kid,
I had visions of being a hero ― a police officer or an
astronaut. However, people would always tell me, “You
can’t do that. You aren’t smart enough. You aren’t strong
enough.” Moreover, (d) I didn’t do well in school, and I had
no hope of getting into any college. After high school, I
gave up on my dream of going to college and got a
part-time job instead. I felt like I was living in a box labeled
“This is where you belong.”
(D)
After I finished my time in the Army, I packed my bags
and went to my dream university. I knocked on the door
of one of the professors’ offices and said, “Please, tell me
how to get in here.” The professor could see that I was
determined. He said, “I can’t let you in the university, but
(e) I will see you whenever you need my advice or help.”
It took me a long time, but I eventually got into that
university, became a football player, and graduated.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 주인공에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 대학에서 풋볼 선수였다.
② 육군에 입대했다.
③ Chicago에서 태어났다.
④ 고등학교 졸업 직후 대학에 진학했다.
⑤ 입학하고 싶어하는 대학의 교수를 찾아갔다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

1
8
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, thanks. I don’t like pizza.
② Right. We can use it anytime.
③ Yes. You can get it from a store.
④ It’s okay. You’ll do better next time.
⑤ Sure. You need to download the app first.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. I’ll try it.
② Actually, I was too sick.
③ Luckily, I got a high score.
④ Sorry. But I can’t teach you.
⑤ Well, I bought a birthday card.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 직원 채용을 안내하려고
② 화산의 위험성을 경고하려고
③ 야생 동물 보호를 호소하려고
④ 모험 여행 참가자를 모집하려고
⑤ 전통 음식의 우수성을 홍보하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 청소년기 교우 관계의 특성
② 대화 시 언어 선택의 중요성
③ 규칙적인 운동과 건강의 상관관계
④ 봉사 활동이 청소년에게 미치는 영향
⑤ 부모와 십 대 자녀 간의 갈등 해소 방법
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 은행원 － 고객 ② 아파트 주민 － 경비원
③ 호텔 지배인 － 투숙객 ④ 항공기 승무원 － 탑승객
⑤ 편의점 직원 － 택배 기사
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to revise the script of the play
② to make a poster for the concert
③ to change the design of a costume
④ to build the stage for the musical
⑤ to confirm the rehearsal schedule
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 작년에 병원에 입원했던 이유를 고르시오.
① 상한 우유를 마셔서 ② 과식으로 배탈이 나서
③ 독성 식물을 만져서 ④ 임상 실험에 참여하려고
⑤ 건강 검진을 받기 위해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $140 ② $180 ③ $200 ④ $252 ⑤ $280
10. 대화를 듣고, 슬라이드 자료에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 디자인 ② 글자 크기 ③ 음향 효과
④ 사진 ⑤ 도표
11. Global in Action에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오.
① 비영리 기관이다.
② 전직 테니스 선수가 설립했다.
③ 1,000명 이상의 회원이 있다.
④ 집 짓는 일을 도와준다.
⑤ 재정적 기부를 받지 않는다.
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 수강할 방과 후
프로그램을 고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Sorry. I can’t work the night shift.
② No worries. I’ll go to the music store.
③ Definitely. He’ll move in with me soon.
④ Sure. I’ll tell him not to practice late at night.
⑤ That’s okay. He won’t mind playing the guitar.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Don’t worry. I can reserve the seats right away.
② Too bad. I was hoping you could join us.
③ Well done! Now we can enjoy our trip.
④ You’re right. I’d rather take the next flight.
⑤ Thanks. I had a really good time at the festival.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Minsu가 Allison에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Minsu: Allison,
① I’ll hand in your paper for you.
② I can help you correct the errors.
③ I can research the Joseon Dynasty.
④ you should watch a historical movie.
⑤ you should buy an English dictionary.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① tips for a safe hiking trip
② advice for traveling at night
③ qualifications for a park ranger
④ finding shelter in the mountains
⑤ arranging group tours in the wild
17. 고려할 사항으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① weather ② clothing ③ food
④ first aid kit ⑤ emergency supplies
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
If you’re one of the countless people
whose mind and body have been
overworked, you need a program that
will give you a more positive and energetic life: the
Health Management Program offered by the ABC
Well-Being Institute. This program lasts for six
weeks and consists of three different components:
Daily Targets, Walking Plans, and Eating Plans.
Each week, you’ll be advised by our health experts
and introduced to new physical activity targets. Are
you serious about improving your life immediately?
Then, you can start by enrolling in our fantastic
program today.
① 스포츠 센터 강사를 모집하려고
② 건강관리 프로그램을 홍보하려고
③ 걷기 운동의 효과를 강조하려고
④ 스트레스의 위험성을 경고하려고
⑤ 약물 남용의 부작용을 설명하려고
19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Everybody has moments of doubt about something or
other from time to time; it is a natural process. The
challenge is not to let those moments accumulate and
affect your self-belief. You will always face the challenge
of other people’s comments and opinion. There are
people that you feel good being around and others you
don’t. Some people give you positive energy because
they believe in you. You feel it and you rise to the
occasion. Others may always have a negative comment to
make about what you are doing or talking about. Don’t
let these comments rock your self-belief. Always question
the person’s reason for the comment. If it is based on
fact, you should listen; if not, then it is only their
opinion. You will need to stay strong.
* rise to the occasion: 위기 상황에서 능력을 발휘하다
① 인맥이 넓은 사람들과 교제하라.
② 성공하기 위해 도전적인 자세를 가지라.
③ 일시적 감정으로 타인을 비판하지 말라.
④ 좌절감을 느낄 때는 성공한 경험을 생각하라.
⑤ 선별적인 의견 수용으로 자기 확신이 흔들리지 않게 하라.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
20. 다음 글에 드러난 Delia의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Delia stepped out of the front door of her house, and the
day welcomed her with a warm and sunny smile. With each
step, she thought, “I can’t wait for today’s class.” Her
family had recently moved into the neighborhood, and the
new school year had just begun at Elanova High School.
Her new school offered ballet lessons, and Delia eagerly
signed up. She was one step closer to fulfilling her lifelong
dream of becoming a ballerina. Delia sat at the bench
waiting for the school bus. As the bus rolled down Madison
Avenue, she slipped her hand into her ballet bag to touch
her new shoes. She thought about working hard on her leaps
and jumps. “I want to soar to the moon,” Delia thought.
① hopeful ② bored ③ relaxed
④ worried ⑤ scared
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One reason many people keep delaying things they should
do is that they fear they will do them wrong or poorly, so
they just don’t do them at all. For example, one of the best
ways to write a book is to write it as quickly as possible,
getting your thoughts onto paper without regard to style.
Then, you can go back to revise and polish your writing.
If I only wrote when I knew it would be perfect, I’d still
be working on my first book! Do you have a hard time
relaxing if your house is a mess? Do you beat yourself up
for making mistakes? I’ve got a simple message for you
today: It’s time to let go of your perfectionism. It becomes
a stumbling block that keeps you stuck.
① 잦은 실수는 큰 실수를 유발한다.
② 주변을 정리하는 습관이 중요하다.
③ 책을 집필하기 위해서는 인내가 필요하다.
④ 완벽주의는 일을 추진하는 데 방해가 된다.
⑤ 타인의 입장에서 생각하는 것이 바람직하다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Textiles and clothing have functions that go beyond just
protecting the body. Dress and textiles alike are used as a
means of nonverbal communication. Obvious examples
would be the use of uniforms to communicate a particular
social role and the modern white wedding dress Western
cultures use to mark this rite of passage. Both types of
clothing communicate important information nonverbally to
the onlooker. The female wearing the white dress is about to
be married and change her status and role in society. The
person in the uniform has some specialized function in
society, such as police officer, nurse, or soldier. Therefore, it
can be said that clothing visually communicates information
about group membership and functions as an identity marker.
① educational functions of uniforms
② ways to diversify styles of clothing
③ gender differences in choosing clothing
④ different cultural norms of Western society
⑤ nonverbal communicative functions of clothing
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Traditional consumption was not particularly thrifty. The
concept of thrift emerged out of a more affluent money
culture. In traditional societies where resources continued to
be scarce, consumption was more seasonally and
communally orientated. In years of bountiful crops people
ate heartily, and in lean years they starved. People were not
particularly motivated to produce more goods for
stockpiling, as there was little incentive to do so where
there was little security from raids. When times were good,
celebrations of gluttony were held in the winter season
when stocks could not be refilled. These rituals were more
important than the potential hardships such celebrations
might later bring, as they served to bind people together and
distribute resources. Holiday rituals were typically structured
around cultural practices such as song, dance, theater, and
feasting, and took a great deal of time away from work.
* affluent: 풍부한
** gluttony: 폭식
① What Motivated Traditional Consumption?
② Communal Production of Winter Foods
③ Refilling Stocks: A Survival Necessity
④ How to Survive after a Bad Harvest
⑤ What Constitutes Holiday Rituals?
24. Stonehenge Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① audio guide는 영어로만 제공된다.
② Stonehenge 안내서는 제공되지 않는다.
③ 60세 이상의 노인들은 무료이다.
④ 버스는 오전에만 출발한다.
⑤ 좌석 확보는 온라인 예약으로만 가능하다.
STONEHENGE TOUR
The great and ancient stone circle
of Stonehenge is one of the
greatest wonders of the world.
Enjoy the stones with a fascinating audio-guided tour, in
the language of your choice!
Included Highlights
∙Express Service to Stonehenge by Luxury Bus
∙Stonehenge Guidebook
Prices & Bus Departures
∙Adults: £44.00 Children (3-12): £39.00
Seniors (60 and over) / Students: £42.00
∙Days: Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday
∙Times & Places: 10:00 am, Royal National Hotel
11:00 am, Victoria Station
To secure your seat, please arrive at least 15 minutes
prior to departure or book online 24 hours in advance.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. Kids Library Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
① 6세 미만의 어린이는 어른을 동반해야 한다.
② 캠프는 오후에 진행된다.
③ 도서관 시설의 이용 방법을 배운다.
④ 캠프 참가 사전 등록이 필요하다.
⑤ 캠프 등록비를 내야 한다.
26. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The pie charts above show the Breakdown of Solid
Waste, particularly focusing on Domestic Waste, of the
state of New South Wales, Australia. ① With regard to
Total Urban Solid Waste, the percentage of Commercial &
Industrial is more than twice as high as that of
Construction & Demolition. ② The Domestic category
makes up about a third of Total Urban Solid Waste. ③ Of
Domestic Waste, Food & Garden accounts for the highest
percentage, while the percentage of Ferrous is the lowest.
④ Other Waste is 15% of Domestic Waste, which is five
times higher than the percentage of Plastics. ⑤ Diapers
and Glass each are less than five percent of Domestic
Waste.
* ferrous: 철(쇠)의
27. living rock cactus에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Living rock cactus is one of the most peculiar plants
found in the desert. For most of the year, it blends into
the rocky limestone soils of the Dead Horse Mountains,
Mariscal Mountain, and the hills along the Rio Grande.
You may step on one before you notice it. Spineless and
flat against the ground, it has triangular tubercles that
overlap in a star-shaped pattern. In extremely dry conditions,
living rock cactus is almost invisible: it literally shrinks
into the surrounding rocky soil. Moisture is stored in the
root, and during droughts the root shrinks, dragging the
stem underground. These spineless plants survive by
blending into their native habitat. As added protection,
they store foul-tasting, poisonous alkaloids in their bodies.
* limestone: 석회암
** tubercle: 작은 돌기
① 사막에서 발견되는 특이한 식물 중 하나이다.
② 삼각형 모양의 작은 돌기를 가지고 있다.
③ 매우 건조한 조건에서는 눈에 거의 보이지 않는다.
④ 가뭄 기간에는 뿌리가 팽창한다.
⑤ 독성이 있는 알칼로이드를 체내에 저장한다.
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
The term objectivity is important in measurement because
of the scientific demand that observations be subject to
public verification. A measurement system is objective to
the extent that two observers (A) evaluate / evaluating the
same performance arrive at the same (or very similar)
measurements. For example, using a tape measure to
determine the distance a javelin (B) threw / was thrown yields
very similar results regardless of who reads the tape. By
comparison, evaluation of performances such as diving,
gymnastics, and figure skating is more subjective ─ although
elaborate scoring rules help make (C) it / them more objective.
From the point of view of research in motor behavior, it is
important to use performances in the laboratory for which
the scoring can be as objective as possible.
* javelin: 투창
(A) (B) (C)
① evaluate …… threw …… it
② evaluate …… threw …… them
③ evaluating …… threw …… it
④ evaluating …… was thrown …… them
⑤ evaluating …… was thrown …… it
Kids Library Camp
Premont Library
(July 29 & 30, 2015)
★ A 2-day camp for children aged 6 and over
(Children under 6 must be accompanied by an adult.)
★ Time: 1:00 pm - 6:00 pm, on both days
★ Learn How To:
- use library facilities
- produce online videos
- create your own story books
∙Spaces are limited, so advance registration is required.
Registrations are accepted only at www.premont.lib.
∙No registration fee
∙For further details, contact Ms. Huggon
at huggon@premont.lib or (877) 123-4567.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
A special feature of the real estate rental market is its
tendency to undergo a severe and prolonged contraction
phase, more so than with manufactured products. When the
supply of a manufactured product ① exceeds the demand,
the manufacturer cuts back on output, and the merchant
reduces inventory to balance supply and demand.
However, ② property owners cannot reduce the amount
of space available for rent in their buildings. Space that
was constructed to accommodate business and consumer
needs at the peak of the cycle ③ remains, so vacancy
rates climb and the downward trend becomes more severe.
Rental rates generally do not drop below a certain point,
the ④ maximum that must be charged in order to cover
operating expenses. Some owners will take space off the
market rather than lose money on it. A few, unable to
subsidize the property, will sell at distress prices, and
lenders will repossess others. These may then be placed
on the market at lower rental rates, further ⑤ depressing
the market.
* contraction phase: 경기 수축기(후퇴기)
** distress price: 투매 가격(판매자가 손해를 감수하는 매우 싼 가격)
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Born in Budapest to a family of bankers, von Neumann
was undeniably bright. At age eight, ① he had mastered
calculus. At age twelve, he was reading works aimed at
professional mathematicians. But ② he also loved to
invent mechanical toys and became a child expert on
Byzantine history. When it was time to go off to
university, he agreed to study chemical engineering as a
compromise with his father, who feared that ③ his son
couldn’t make a living as a mathematician. Von Neumann
kept his bargain by enrolling at the University of
Budapest and promptly leaving for Berlin, where he spent
his time doing mathematics, and returning to Budapest at
the end of every semester to take examinations. He
published ④ his second mathematics paper, in which he
gave the modern definition of ordinal numbers, at age
nineteen. By age twenty-five ⑤ he had published ten
major papers; by age thirty, nearly three dozen.
* calculus: 미적분학
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Not all interesting discoveries have an obvious
application. If you believe you have something, but
you’re not sure what exactly it’s going to be good for,
don’t give up. Many innovations languished in labs for
years until they were . Teflon, an
extremely slippery synthetic substance employed as a
coating on cooking utensils, was invented in 1938, but it
didn’t coat its first pan till 1954. The Post-it note was
built on the back of some not-very-good glue. Its
inventor believed it might have value, but it took him
five years to find a potentially profitable use for it. HP
had a breakthrough with a super-accurate thermometer
that was created in the HP Labs. Despite its accuracy,
there was no clear use for the device until it was used to
measure fluctuations in ocean temperature. [3점]
* languish: 시들해지다
① replaced by new ones
② matched to a product
③ backed up by a theory
④ found to be eco-friendly
⑤ tested for their accuracy
32. Empathy is a character trait that we value in ourselves
and in our friends, colleagues, and the professionals who
serve us. The know-how to be empathetic is central to
practical wisdom: unless we can understand how others
think and feel, it’s difficult to know the right thing to do.
But empathy has its dark side: too much understanding and
sensitivity, too much seeing things from the other’s
perspective, can .
Edmund Pellegrino, a scholar of bioethics, explains it like
this: “If a physician identifies too closely as co-sufferer
with the patient, she loses the objectivity essential to the
most precise assessment of what is wrong, of what can be
done, and of what should be done to meet those needs.
Excessive co-suffering also impedes and may even
paralyze the physician into a state of inaction.”
* impede: 방해하다
① block everlasting friendship
② justify doctors’ abuse of power
③ cloud judgment and paralyze choice
④ lead to a hasty but correct diagnosis
⑤ decrease doctors’ compassion for patients
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. Bees have their choice of flora according to color.
Lord Avenbury once made an experiment to see if the
color of flowers attracted bees. Placing honey on slips of
paper of different shades, he found that the insects which
visited them seemed to have a marked preference for
blue, after which came white, yellow, red, green and
orange. This finding should be considered for our
beekeeping planning. If pollination is the prime
consideration of taming bees and if the crop is identified,
while planning.
Let us consider beekeeping near a mustard field. Mustard
gives tiny yellow flowers full of nectar and pollen. For
better yield of mustard seeds, pollination is necessary.
But if there is plenty of blue-colored wild flora nearby,
bees may prefer the blue flowers to mustard. Although
we shall get honey and other products, the objective for
pollination of mustard may be defeated. [3점]
* flora: 식물군
① bees’ preference for color should be put aside
② a greater harvest can be expected near blue flora
③ the quality of honey should be taken into account
④ the abundance of blue flora nearby must be ensured
⑤ the color of other floras nearby should be considered
34. In the mid-1900s, John Kenneth Galbraith shocked the
field of economics when he insisted that consumers do
not merely participate in the marketplace, they are also
the product of the systematic deployment of power
throughout society. Within this deployment of power,
commercial media ensures that consumers adopt values
and beliefs that match the general requirements of the
economy. The individual’s participation in mass behavior
patterns is .
Consumers engage in shared patterns of consumption
because they live within an economic system that
operates as a belief system. It exercises considerable
control over the meaning and value of things. When the
economy functions as a belief system, it establishes
severe limits on a consumer’s free choice. As consumers,
our choices are not entirely our own. Our beliefs, values,
thoughts, and emotions are highly conditioned to match
the needs of the marketplace. [3점]
* deployment: 배치
① not driven by commercial media’s agenda
② a product of unconditioned personal choice
③ not a spontaneous reaction to random forces
④ not affected by the needs of the marketplace
⑤ an outcome irrelevant to the economic system
35. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
We’ve all heard the phrase “the family that plays
together, stays together.” The wisdom in this phrase is
that social play builds ties between people that are
lasting and consequential.
(A) In crying out, the danger-spotting squirrel draws
attention to itself, which may well attract the
predator. Scientists used to think that animals would
risk their lives like this only for kin with whom they
shared common genes.
(B) This wisdom holds outside the human family circle
as well. For example, when one ground squirrel sees
a predator in the distance, it will sound an alarm call
that alerts other squirrels to run for cover. It’s a
risky move.
(C) New evidence suggests, however, that squirrels also
sound alarm calls for former playmates, not genetically
related. These squirrels developed a social resource
while playing ― and these buddies will put their lives
on the line to save their playmates.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[36～37] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
36.
The study also revealed the commanders had given
more attention and praise to the crew members for
whom they had the higher expectations.
Self-fulfilling prophecies can have a positive side. ( ① )
We know that students introduced to their teachers as
“intellectual bloomers” often do better on achievement
tests than do their counterparts who lack such a positive
introduction. ( ② ) In a study of army tank crews, one
set of tank commanders was told that some members of
their assigned crews had exceptional abilities while others
were only average. ( ③ ) In reality, the crew members
had been assigned randomly so that the two test groups
were equal in ability. ( ④ ) The commanders later
reported that the so-called “exceptional” crew members
performed better than the “average” ones. ( ⑤ ) The
self-fulfilling effects in these cases strongly suggest that
managers adopt positive and optimistic approaches toward
others at work.
* bloomer: 재능을 발휘하는 사람
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
But neither are aware of this fact when it comes to
unmarked crosswalks.
Studies do show that motorists are more likely to yield
to pedestrians in marked crosswalks than at unmarked
crosswalks. But as some researchers found, that does not
necessarily make things safer. ( ① ) When they compared
the way pedestrians crossed at both kinds of crosswalks
on roads with considerable traffic volumes, they found that
people at unmarked crosswalks tended to look both ways
more often, waited more often for gaps in traffic, and
crossed the road more quickly. ( ② ) Researchers suspect
that both drivers and pedestrians are more aware that
drivers should yield to pedestrians in marked crosswalks.
( ③ ) Not knowing traffic safety laws, it turns out, is
actually a good thing for pedestrians. ( ④ ) Because they
do not know whether cars are supposed to stop, they act
more cautiously. ( ⑤ ) Marked crosswalks, by contrast,
may give pedestrians an unrealistic picture of their own
safety. [3점]
[38～39] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
38. Some researchers investigated the effects of different
media on children’s ability to produce imaginative responses.
In one study, children in grades one through four were
separated randomly into two groups and presented with
the same fictional story. One group listened to the story
via radio, while the other group watched the story on a
television. ① Afterward, all of the children were asked
what they thought would happen next in the story. ② The
researchers rated children’s imaginativeness by recording
the novel elements (such as characters, setting, dialogue,
and feelings) they used in their responses. ③ Some
novelists prefer to include as many characters as possible
in their stories. ④ The children who listened to the radio
produced more imaginative responses, whereas the children
who watched the television produced more words that
repeated the original story. ⑤ Media scholars have used
this study to illustrate the “visualization hypothesis,” which
states that children’s exposure to ready-made visual images
restricts their ability to generate novel images of their own.
39. One of the many strengths of the African American
community is an intrinsic support for the athletic endeavors
of African American girls and women. ① Since African
American culture appreciates a greater flexibility of gender
roles and accepts a broader range of gender-appropriate
behaviors, African American women are not as bound as
white women by gender role stereotypes. ② Athletics for
girls and women is not perceived as conflicting with an African
American female’s gender role. ③ Hall and Bower’s study
of African American females found that African American
women defined themselves as “softly strong” ― owning
both strength and femininity without conflict. ④ African
American males have played an increasingly important role
in global politics. ⑤Welcome support from the African
American community has energized many African American
girls and women to participate in sports.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Experts have found that reading classical texts benefits
the mind by catching the reader’s attention and triggering
moments of self-reflection. The brain activity of volunteers
was monitored as they read classical works. These same
texts were then “translated” into more straightforward,
modern language and again the readers’ brains were
monitored as they read the words. Scans showed that the
more challenging prose and poetry set off far more
electrical activity in the brain than the more pedestrian
versions. Scientists were able to study the brain activity as
it responded to each word and record how it lit up as the
readers encountered unusual words, surprising phrases or
difficult sentence structures. This lighting up lasts long
enough to shift the brain into a higher gear, encouraging
further reading. The research also found that reading the
more challenging version of poetry, in particular, increases
activity in the right hemisphere of the brain, helping the
readers to reflect on and reevaluate their own experiences
in light of what they have read. The academics said this
meant the classics were more useful than self-help books.
󰀻
Original versions of classical texts are helpful to readers
because they contain (A) language that inspires
further reading and (B) readers’ self-reflection.
(A) (B)
① challenging …… distorts
② demanding …… activates
③ comprehensible …… increases
④ difficult …… hinders
⑤ accessible …… stimulates
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Organisms must compete for resources not only with
members of their own species, but with members of
other species. When two species use the same resource
and the resource is scarce, the species must compete just
as if they were members of the same population. One
of the two species usually turns out to be better at the
competition. If two species eat exactly the same food, for
example, one of the two will be better at catching it.
Unless something interferes, the inferior competitor loses
out and the competitively superior species takes over.
When one species eliminates another by outcompeting it,
it is called competitive exclusion.
Sometimes a competitively superior species is prevented
from excluding poorer competitors. Periodic disturbances
such as severe storms, battering by drifting logs, or
underwater landslides can reduce the population of a
dominant competitor and give other species a chance.
Furthermore, which species is competitively superior
sometimes depends on the conditions. On rocky shores
in tropical Hong Kong, for example, foliose (leaf-like)
algae are the dominant seaweeds during the relatively
cool winter. In the summer heat, these forms die out
and are replaced by more resistant encrusting algae.
Seasonal variation thus prevents either group from
excluding the other, and there is a
between the competing species.
* encrust: 외피를 형성하다
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Innate Advantages of the Strong
② How Are the Superior Determined?
③ Population Growth in Marine Life
④ Why Do Species Avoid Competing?
⑤ Every Aspect of a Species’ Lifestyle
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① shifting balance ② fixed hierarchy
③ strong dependency ④ lasting collaboration
⑤ one-way relationship
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Jim Nelson, a junior at Manti High School, was an
outstanding athlete. He had just made the school
basketball team, one of the best in the state. But on
October 23, 1996, most of (a) his athletic future was
suddenly taken away from him. Jim was riding his
bicycle at night to visit his friend. The road was very
steep in some places. It was very dark and difficult to see.
(B)
Because of his injury, Jim wasn’t able to play on the
basketball team during the rest of that year, but the
coach did make him equipment manager so that he
could come and practice. All summer long in 1997, each
and every night, (b) he practiced making left-handed
baskets. When the next season arrived, Jim was ready to
try out for the team ― and he made it again!
(C)
As he came around a sloping curve on his bicycle, Jim
hit a car parked on the side of the road. (c) He ended
up in the hospital. Besides bad cuts on his head, he
broke his right arm and was in a cast for two months.
Jim’s doctor gave him a series of tests. The doctor
concluded that (d) he had suffered nerve damage and
that he might never regain the full use of his right arm.
(D)
Jim never became a starter, but he was always the
first substitute to go in the game. Jim got a chance to
play in the last 30 seconds of the championship game
when a starting player sprained (e) his ankle. With 10
seconds left, Jim balanced the ball in his left hand and
took the shot. The crowd was deathly quiet until ―
swish! He made the three-point-shot left-handed! Jim
won not only the game but also the hearts of his
teammates for proving that with determination, no
obstacle is too great.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 Jim에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Manti 고등학교의 뛰어난 운동선수였다.　　　
② 부상당한 해의 남은 경기에는 선수로 참여하지 못했다.
③ 자전거를 타고 가다가 주차된 차에 부딪쳤다.
④ 챔피언 결정전에 처음부터 출전했다.
⑤ 왼손으로 3점 슛을 성공시켰다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
1
8
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지 1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sorry. I already ate dinner.
② No. I’ve never met him before.
③ Sure. Thanks for the invitation.
④ Yes. I bought a box of chocolates.
⑤ Good. I hate working on weekends.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No problem. I’ll pick up your daughter.
② You’re welcome. It’s my pleasure.
③ Wow, this winter is really cold.
④ I agree. The timing isn’t good.
⑤ Okay, let me take a look.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 교복 물려주기를 권장하려고
② 기부 행사 참여를 독려하려고
③ 생활 용품 절약을 장려하려고
④ 학교 식당 공사를 안내하려고
⑤ 학부모 간담회 일정을 공지하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 수면 문제를 해결하는 방법
② 휴대전화와 업무 효율성의 관계
③ 미디어 기기가 학습에 미치는 영향
④ 규칙적인 운동의 중요성
⑤ 충분한 낮잠의 필요성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 연출가 － 배우 ② 작곡가 － 가수
③ 사회자 － 요리사 ④ 식당 지배인 － 고객
⑤ 농장 주인 － 도매업자
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to remove election posters
② to take the adviser position
③ to cancel the student meeting
④ to speak out against school violence
⑤ to register as a presidential candidate
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 야구 경기를 보러 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 독감에 걸려서
② 비행기를 놓쳐서
③ 동생을 돌봐야 해서
④ 회의에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 입장권을 구할 수 없어서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $9 ② $16 ③ $18 ④ $20 ⑤ $27
10. 대화를 듣고, 미용실에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을
고르시오.
① 가게 이름 ② 위치 ③ 남자 이발 비용
④ 영업시간 ⑤ 미용사 이름
11. science essay contest에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 고등학생이 참가할 수 있다.
② 에세이 주제가 두 가지이다.
③ 에세이 분량에 제한이 있다.
④ 온라인으로만 에세이 제출을 허용한다.
⑤ 참가자 전원에게 후원 기관 견학 기회를 준다.
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 패키지
상품을 고르시오.
Attraction Packages at Grandlife Amusement Park
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Set a time limit when making a presentation.
② The more knowledge, the better the interview.
③ The company buys your creativity, not your image.
④ Interviewing is no more than expressing yourself.
⑤ Too much confidence in your vision doesn’t help.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I’ll write it down for you then.
② You should share it with others.
③ You prepared a lot for the event.
④ I can memorize your phone number.
⑤ Let’s go to the history museum now.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Peter가 Sandra에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Peter: Sandra,
① I think you need to take a break for a while.
② I recommend you return your book soon.
③ I’d suggest changing where you study.
④ you’d better review what you learned.
⑤ you should’ve slept more last night.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① consequences of communication problems
② difficulties of managing a relationship
③ various merits of having hobbies
④ causes of conflict within a family
⑤ ways of making peace with family members
17. 언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① a letter ② a picture ③ cookies
④ earrings ⑤ flowers
18. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One difference between winners and losers is how they handle
losing. Even for the best companies and most accomplished
professionals, long track records of success are punctuated by
slips, slides, and mini-turnarounds. Even the team that wins
the game might make mistakes and lag behind for part of it.
That’s why the ability to recover quickly is so important.
Troubles are ubiquitous. Surprises can fall from the sky like
volcanic ash and appear to change everything. That’s why one
prominent scholar said, “Anything can look like a failure in
the middle.” Thus, a key factor in high achievement is
bouncing back from the low points.
① 경영의 전문화는 일류 기업의 조건이다.
② 위기 관리에는 전문가의 조언이 필요하다.
③ 합리적 소비는 필요와 욕구의 구분에서 비롯된다.
④ 폭넓은 인간 관계는 성공의 필수 요소이다.
⑤ 실패를 빨리 극복하는 것이 성공의 열쇠이다.
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
As I walked to the train station, I felt the warm sun on my
back. I caught my train on time. It arrived at my destination ten
minutes early, which was perfect, as I was due to present my
new idea to the company at 10 a.m. The presentation went better
than expected, and my manager seemed particularly pleased.
Later that day, my manager called me into her office. She smiled
at me and said, “James, you’ve been with us for six years now.
How would you feel if I were to offer you the Sales Director
position in London?” Sales Director in London! Wow! This was
a dream come true for me. I couldn’t believe what I had just heard!
① joyful ② jealous ③ outraged
④ confused ⑤ indifferent
[20～21] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
20. Many disciplines are better learned by entering into the
doing than by mere abstract study. This is often the case with
the most abstract as well as the seemingly more practical
disciplines. For example, within the philosophical disciplines,
logic must be learned through the use of examples and actual
problem solving. Only after some time and struggle does the
student begin to develop the insights and intuitions that enable
him to see the centrality and relevance of this mode of
thinking. This learning by doing is essential in many of the
sciences. For instance, only after a good deal of observation do
the sparks in the bubble chamber become recognizable as the
specific movements of identifiable particles.
① history of science education
② limitations of learning strategies
③ importance of learning by doing
④ effects of intuition on scientific discoveries
⑤ difference between philosophy and science
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3
8
21. The most normal and competent child encounters what
seem like insurmountable problems in living. But by playing
them out, he may become able to cope with them in a
step-by-step process. He often does so in symbolic ways that
are hard for even him to understand, as he is reacting to inner
processes whose origin may be buried deep in his
unconscious. This may result in play that makes little sense to
us at the moment, since we do not know the purposes it
serves. When there is no immediate danger, it is usually best
to approve of the child’s play without interfering. Efforts to
assist him in his struggles, while well intentioned, may divert
him from seeking and eventually finding the solution that will
serve him best.
① dangers of playing violent games to mental health
② beneficial influence of playing outdoors in childhood
③ children’s play as problem solving with minimal intervention
④ necessity of intervening in disputes between siblings
⑤ parental roles in children’s physical development
[22～23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. At some time in their lives, most people pause to reflect on
their own moral principles and on the practical implications of
those principles, and they sometimes think about what
principles people should have or which moral standards can
be best justified. When a person accepts a moral principle,
naturally the person believes the principle is important and
well justified. But there is more to moral principles than that.
When a principle is part of a person’s moral code, that person
is strongly motivated toward the conduct required by the
principle, and against behavior that conflicts with that
principle. The person will tend to feel guilty when his or her
own conduct violates that principle and to disapprove of
others whose behavior conflicts with it. Likewise, the person
will tend to hold in esteem those whose conduct shows an
abundance of the motivation required by the principle.
① Feeling Guilty? Check Your Self-Esteem First
② Do Not Let Your Moral Principles Change!
③ Moral Integrity: A Principle of Philosophy
④ How Do People Form Their Personalities?
⑤ Moral Principles: Guiding Our Conduct
23. The key to successful risk taking is to understand that the
actions you’re taking should be the natural next step. One of
the mistakes we often make when confronting a risk situation
is our tendency to focus on the end result. Skiers who are
unsure of themselves often do this. They’ll go to the edge of a
difficult slope, look all the way down to the bottom, and
determine that the slope is too steep for them to try. The ones
that decide to make it change their focus by analyzing what
they need to do to master the first step, like getting through
the first mogul on the hill. Once they get there, they
concentrate on the next mogul, and over the course of the run,
they end up at the bottom of what others thought was an
impossible mountain.
* mogul: 모굴(스키의 활주 사면에 있는 단단한 눈 더미)
① Separating the Possible from the Impossible
② Focus on the Next Step, Not the Final Result
③ Start with Ultimate Goals in Mind!
④ The Wonders of Committed Efforts
⑤ Success Through Risk Avoidance
24. Georg Dionysius Ehret에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
The 18th century is called the Golden Age of botanical
painting, and Georg Dionysius Ehret is often praised as the
greatest botanical artist of the time. Born in Heidelberg,
Germany, he was the son of a gardener who taught him much
about art and nature. As a young man, Ehret traveled around
Europe, largely on foot, observing plants and developing his
artistic skills. In Holland, he became acquainted with the
Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus. Through his collaborations with
Linnaeus and others, Ehret provided illustrations for a number
of significant horticultural publications. Ehret’s reputation for
scientific accuracy gained him many commissions from wealthy
patrons, particularly in England, where he eventually settled.
* horticultural: 원예(학)의
① 18세기의 가장 위대한 식물 화가로서 칭송받는다.
② 정원사의 아들이었다.
③ 젊은 시절 주로 마차로 유럽을 여행하였다.
④ 다수의 원예 출판물에 삽화를 제공하였다.
⑤ 영국에 정착하였다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4
8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentages of Americans aged
12-17 who posted certain types of personal information on
social media sites in 2006 and in 2012. ① The year 2012 saw
an overall percentage increase in each category of posted
personal information. ② In both years, the percentage of the
young Americans who posted photos of themselves was the
highest of all the categories. ③ In 2006, the percentage of
those who posted city or town names was higher than that of
those who posted school names. ④ Regarding posted email
addresses, the percentage of 2012 was three times higher than
that of 2006. ⑤ Compared to 2006, 2012 recorded an eighteen
percent increase in the category of cell phone numbers.
26. Short Film Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 교수들이 제작한 영화가 상영된다.
② 오전에 세 시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 영화 전공 학생에게만 입장료를 할인해 준다.
④ 입장권은 환불이 가능하다.
⑤ 무료 음료가 입장료에 포함된다.
27. After-School Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
① 지역의 십 대들을 위한 무료 프로그램이다.
② 신청자가 20명 미만인 수업은 취소된다.
③ 모든 수업은 Simpson Building에서 진행된다.
④ 등록 신청서는 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.
⑤ 추가 정보는 웹사이트나 이메일을 이용하면 된다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
During the early stages when the aquaculture industry was
rapidly expanding, mistakes were made and these were costly
both in terms of direct losses and in respect of the industry’s
image. High-density rearing led to outbreaks of infectious
diseases that in some cases ① devastated not just the caged
fish, but local wild fish populations too. The negative impact
on local wildlife inhabiting areas ② close to the fish farms
continues to be an ongoing public relations problem for the
industry. Furthermore, a general lack of knowledge and
insufficient care being taken when fish pens were initially
constructed ③ meaning that pollution from excess feed and
fish waste created huge barren underwater deserts. These were
costly lessons to learn, but now stricter regulations are in
place to ensure that fish pens are placed in sites ④ where there
is good water flow to remove fish waste. This, in addition to
other methods that decrease the overall amount of uneaten
food, ⑤ has helped aquaculture to clean up its act.
AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM
December 1, 2014－January 30, 2015
Are you looking for fun and exciting classes?
Come on down to the Green Hills Community Center to
check out our FREE program for local teens!
Classes
∙Art, Music, Taekwondo
∙Classes with fewer than 20 applicants will be canceled.
Time & Place
∙The program will run from Monday to Friday
(5:00 pm to 7:00 pm).
∙All classes will take place in the Simpson Building.
How to sign up
∙Registration forms must be sent by email to the address
below by 6:00 pm, November 28. Please download the
forms from our website at www.greenhills.org.
For additional information, please visit our website
or send an email to bill@greenhills.org.
SHORT FILM FESTIVAL
We will be hosting nine short films, which were written,
directed, acted and produced by students from the College
of Performing Arts & Film, Pamil University.
∙Date: Friday, November 21, 2014
∙Time: 7:00 pm－10:00 pm
∙Place: Pamil Auditorium, Pamil University
∙Price:
$10 (general admission)
$5 (discount for all university students with a valid ID)
- Tickets can be purchased from the student union
office from Monday, November 17, 2014.
- All tickets are non-refundable.
- FREE beverage included in ticket price
∙For more information, please call the student union
office at (343) 777-8338.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5
8
29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Nancy was struggling to see the positive when ① her teen
daughter was experiencing a negative perspective on her life
and abilities. In her desire to parent intentionally, ② she went
into her daughter’s room and noted one positive accomplishment
she had observed. “I know you’ve been having a hard time
lately, and you aren’t feeling really good or positive about
your life. But you did a great job cleaning up your room
today, and ③ I know that must have been a big effort for you.”
The next day, to Nancy’s surprise, the teen girl seemed
somewhat cheerful. In passing, ④ she said, “Mom, thanks for
saying the positive thing about me yesterday. I was feeling so
down and couldn’t think of anything good about myself. After
⑤ you said that positive thing, it helped me see one good
quality in myself, and I’ve been holding onto those words.”
30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
While the eye sees at the surface, the ear tends to penetrate
below the surface. Joachim-Ernst Berendt points out that the ear
is the only sense that (A) fuses / replaces an ability to measure
with an ability to judge. We can discern different colors, but
we can give a precise number to different sounds. Our eyes do
not let us perceive with this kind of (B) diversity / precision . An
unmusical person can recognize an octave and, perhaps once
instructed, a quality of tone, that is, a C or an F-sharp. Berendt
points out that there are few ‘acoustical illusions’ ― something
sounding like something that in fact it is not ― while there are
many optical illusions. The ears do not lie. The sense of
hearing gives us a remarkable connection with the invisible,
underlying order of things. Through our ears we gain access to
vibration, which (C) underlies / undermines everything around
us. The sense of tone and music in another’s voice gives us an
enormous amount of information about that person, about her
stance toward life, about her intentions.
* acoustical: 청각의
(A) (B) (C)
① fuses …… precision …… undermines
② replaces …… diversity …… underlies
③ fuses …… diversity …… undermines
④ replaces …… precision …… underlies
⑤ fuses …… precision …… underlies
[31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The concept of humans doing multiple things at a time has
been studied by psychologists since the 1920s, but the term
“multitasking” didn’t exist until the 1960s. It was used to
describe computers, not people. Back then, ten megahertz was
so fast that a new word was needed to describe a computer’s
ability to quickly perform many tasks. In retrospect, they
probably made a poor choice, for the expression “multitasking”
is inherently deceptive. Multitasking is about multiple tasks
alternately sharing one resource (the CPU), but in time the
context was flipped and it became interpreted to mean multiple
tasks being done simultaneously by one resource (a person). It
was a clever turn of phrase that’s misleading, for even
computers can process only one piece of code at a time. When
they “multitask,” they switch back and forth, alternating their
attention until both tasks are done. The speed with which
computers tackle multiple tasks that
everything happens at the same time, so comparing computers
to humans can be confusing. [3점]
① expels the myth ② feeds the illusion
③ conceals the fact ④ proves the hypothesis
⑤ blurs the conviction
32. My friend was disappointed that scientific progress has not
cured the world’s ills by abolishing wars and starvation; that
gross human inequality is still widespread; that happiness is
not universal. My friend made a common mistake ― a basic
misunderstanding in the nature of knowledge. Knowledge is
amoral ― not immoral but morality neutral. It can be used for
any purpose, but many people assume it will be used to further
their favorite hopes for society ― and this is the fundamental flaw.
Knowledge of the world is one thing; its uses create a separate
issue. To be disappointed that our progress in understanding
has not remedied the social ills of the world is a legitimate
view, but .
To argue that knowledge is not progressing because of the
African or Middle Eastern conflicts misses the point. There is
nothing inherent in knowledge that dictates any specific social
or moral application. [3점]
① to confuse this with the progress of knowledge is absurd
② to know the nature of knowledge is to practice its moral value
③ to remove social inequality is the inherent purpose of knowledge
④ to accumulate knowledge is to enhance its social application
⑤ to make science progress is to make it cure social ills
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6
8
33. According to a renowned French scholar, the growth in the
size and complexity of human populations was the driving
force in the evolution of science. Early, small communities had
to concentrate all their physical and mental effort on survival;
their thoughts were focused on food and religion. As
communities became larger, some people had time to reflect
and debate. They found that they could understand and predict
events better if they reduced passion and prejudice, replacing
these with observation and inference. But while a large
population may have been necessary, in itself it was not
sufficient for science to germinate. Some empires were big,
but the rigid social control required to hold an empire together
was not beneficial to science, just as it was not beneficial to
reason. The early nurturing and later flowering of science
to support
original thought and freewheeling incentive. The rise in
commerce and the decline of authoritarian religion allowed
science to follow reason in seventeenth-century Europe. [3점]
* germinate: 싹트다, 발아하다
① prompted small communities to adopt harsh social norms
② resulted from passion and enthusiasm rather than inference
③ occurred in large communities with strict hierarchical structures
④ were solely attributed to efforts of survival in a small community
⑤ required a large and loosely structured, competitive community
34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
New media can be defined by four characteristics
simultaneously: they are media at the turn of the 20th and 21st
centuries which are both integrated and interactive and use
digital code and hypertext as technical means. It follows that
their most common alternative names are multimedia,
interactive media and digital media. By using this definition,
it is easy to identify media as old or new. (A) ,
traditional television is integrated as it contains images, sound
and text, but it is not interactive or based on digital code. The
plain old telephone was interactive, but not integrated as it
only transmitted speech and sounds and it did not work with
digital code. In contrast, the new medium of interactive
television adds interactivity and digital code. (B) ,
the new generations of mobile or fixed telephony are fully
digitalized and integrated as they add text, pictures or video
and they are connected to the Internet.
(A) (B)
① For example …… Additionally
② Nevertheless …… In other words
③ Therefore …… Additionally
④ For example …… In other words
⑤ Nevertheless …… Consequently
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
A currently popular attitude is to blame technology or
technologists for having brought on the environmental
problems we face today, and thus to try to slow technological
advance by blocking economic growth. We believe this view
to be thoroughly misguided. ① If technology produced
automobiles that pollute the air, it is because pollution was not
recognized as a problem which engineers had to consider in
their designs. ② Solar energy can be a practical alternative
energy source for us in the foreseeable future. ③ Obviously,
technology that produces pollution is generally cheaper, but
now that it has been decided that cleaner cars are wanted, less
polluting cars will be produced; cars which scarcely pollute at
all could even be made. ④ This last option, however, would
require several years and much investment. ⑤ Although
technology is responsive to the will of the people, it can
seldom respond instantaneously and is never free.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
The impact of color has been studied for decades. For
example, in a factory, the temperature was maintained at
72℉ and the walls were painted a cool blue-green. The
employees complained of the cold.
(A) The psychological effects of warm and cool hues seem to
be used effectively by the coaches of the Notre Dame
football team. The locker rooms used for half-time breaks
were reportedly painted to take advantage of the
emotional impact of certain hues.
(B) The home-team room was painted a bright red, which
kept team members excited or even angered. The
visiting-team room was painted a blue-green, which had a
calming effect on the team members. The success of this
application of color can be noted in the records set by
Notre Dame football teams.
(C) The temperature was maintained at the same level, but the
walls were painted a warm coral. The employees stopped
complaining about the temperature and reported they
were quite comfortable.
* hue: 색조, 색상
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7
8
37.
Food plays a large part in how much you enjoy the
outdoors. The possibilities are endless, so you can
constantly vary your diet.
(A) They walk only a few miles each day and may use the
same campsite for several nights. Survival eaters eat
some dry cereal for breakfast, and are up and walking
within minutes of waking.
(B) Wilderness dining has two extremes: gourmet eaters and
survival eaters. The first like to make camp at lunchtime
so they have several hours to set up field ovens; they bake
cakes and bread and cook multi-course dinners.
(C) They walk dozens of miles every day; lunch is a series of
cold snacks eaten on the move. Dinner consists of a
freeze-dried meal, “cooked” by pouring hot water into the
package.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
The researchers had made this happen by lengthening the
period of daylight to which the peach trees on whose roots
the insects fed were exposed.
Exactly how cicadas keep track of time has always intrigued
researchers, and it has always been assumed that the insects
must rely on an internal clock. Recently, however, one group
of scientists working with the 17-year cicada in California
have suggested that the nymphs use an external cue and that
they can count. ( ① ) For their experiments they took
15-year-old nymphs and moved them to an experimental
enclosure. ( ② ) These nymphs should have taken a further
two years to emerge as adults, but in fact they took just one
year. ( ③ ) By doing this, the trees were “tricked” into
flowering twice during the year rather than the usual once.
( ④ ) Flowering in trees coincides with a peak in amino acid
concentrations in the sap that the insects feed on. ( ⑤ ) So it
seems that the cicadas keep track of time by counting the
peaks.
* nymph: 애벌레
** sap: 수액
39.
They also rated how generally extroverted those fake
extroverts appeared, based on their recorded voices and
body language.
Some years ago, a psychologist named Richard Lippa called
a group of introverts to his lab and asked them to act like
extroverts while pretending to teach a math class. ( ① ) Then
he and his team, with video cameras in hand, measured the
length of their strides, the amount of eye contact they made
with their “students,” the percentage of time they spent
talking, and the volume of their speech. ( ② ) Then Lippa
did the same thing with actual extroverts and compared the
results. ( ③ ) He found that although the latter group came
across as more extroverted, some of the fake extroverts were
surprisingly convincing. ( ④ ) It seems that most of us
know how to fake it to some extent. ( ⑤ ) Whether or not
we’re aware that the length of our strides and the amount of
time we spend talking and smiling mark us as introverts and
extroverts, we know it unconsciously. [3점]
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Plato and Tolstoy both assume that it can be firmly
established that certain works have certain effects. Plato is
sure that the representation of cowardly people makes us
cowardly; the only way to prevent this effect is to suppress
such representations. Tolstoy is confident that the artist
who sincerely expresses feelings of pride will pass those
feelings on to us; we can no more escape than we could
escape an infectious disease. In fact, however, the effects
of art are neither so certain nor so direct. People vary a
great deal both in the intensity of their response to art and
in the form which that response takes. Some people may
indulge fantasies of violence by watching a film instead of
working out those fantasies in real life. Others may be
disgusted by even glamorous representations of violence.
Still others may be left unmoved, neither attracted nor
disgusted.
󰀻
Although Plato and Tolstoy claim that works of art have
a(n) (A) impact on people’s feelings, the degrees
and forms of people’s actual responses (B) greatly.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① unavoidable …… differ ② direct …… converge
③ temporary …… fluctuate ④ unexpected …… converge
⑤ favorable …… differ
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Increased size affects group life in a number of ways. There
is evidence that larger groups (five or six members) are more
productive than smaller groups (two or three members).
Members of larger groups tend to offer more suggestions than
members of smaller groups, and although they seem to reach
less agreement, they also show less tension. These differences
may reflect the greater need of larger groups to solve
organizational problems. Members may realize that their
behavior must become more goal-directed, since it is unlikely
that they can coordinate their actions without making a special
effort to do so. Larger groups also put more pressure on their
members to conform. In such groups, it is harder for everyone
to take part equally in discussions or to have the same amount
of influence on decisions.
There is evidence that groups with an even number of
members differ from groups with an odd number of members.
The former disagree more than the latter and suffer more
deadlocks as a result. Groups with an even number of
members may split into halves. This is impossible in groups
with an odd number of members ― one side always has a
numerical advantage. According to some researchers, the
number five has special significance. Groups of this size
usually the problems we have just outlined.
Moreover, they are not plagued by the fragility and tensions
found in groups of two or three. Groups of five rate high in
member satisfaction; because of the odd number of members,
deadlocks are unlikely when disagreements occur.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Why the Number of Group Members Counts
② Individuality vs. Collectivity in the Workplace
③ Equal Opportunities: Toward Maximum Satisfaction
④ How to Cope with Conflicts in Groups
⑤ Agreement on Group Size Pays Off!
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① probe ② escape ③ mirror
④ trigger ⑤ escalate
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
In my office, I have a framed letter from a couple of children
I have never met. The letter holds a special significance for me.
It reads, “Dear Dr. Brown, thanks for teaching Mr. Wills to
teach Tisha and Kelly.” Mr. Wills is Jeremy Wills, and (a) he is
one of my former students. A few years back, he took my
positive psychology class in college.
(B)
Before long, the reality hit Jeremy hard. Even after
spending many hours each day preparing lesson plans, it
became clear that his methods were not working. One of the
worst moments was when (b) he distributed a math test.
Many students didn’t even look at the exam. They just put
their heads on their desks and slept. Jeremy became so
stressed that he even dreaded going into his classroom.
(C)
After graduation, Jeremy joined an organization that
recruits future leaders to teach in low-income communities.
(c) He was assigned to a small school in a poor rural county
in North Carolina. Later, his assistant principal took note of
Jeremy’s high expectations and asked him to take over (d) his
math class. He took charge of about a dozen failing “special ed”
kids, and Tisha and Kelly were among them. His idealism
ran high, and he thought he would be able to magically fix
all of their problems.
(D)
Jeremy knew something had to change. (e) He then thought
back to my class, remembering how negative emotions can
drag you down, leaving positive emotions unnoticed. That’s
when he decided to focus more on building positive attitudes
within the classroom. He borrowed lessons from my positive
psychology class and even mentioned my name to his students.
As the students’ attitudes became more optimistic, their
confidence with math grew too. At the end of the school year,
80 percent of Jeremy’s students passed the state’s math test.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 Jeremy에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 대학에서 긍정 심리학을 수강했다.
② 많은 시간을 들여 수업 계획서를 준비했다.
③ 스트레스로 인해 교실에 들어가기를 두려워했다.
④ 저소득 지역에서 가르칠 미래 지도자를 모집하는 단체에 가입했다.
⑤ 학년말에 그의 학생의 80퍼센트가 수학 시험에 불합격했다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.