1 8
2015학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역 1
제 3 교시
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No. I don’t like the animal.
② Thanks. You saved my dog.
③ Okay. I’ll take care of your pet.
④ Sorry. I don’t have time to volunteer.
⑤ Of course. They need more volunteers.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Singing makes me feel better.
② I can’t believe I passed the audition.
③ Just sing the song that you really like.
④ Please let me know how to be a good singer.
⑤ I don’t think the song is good for the audition.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고
르시오.
① 학생회 선거 참여를 독려하려고
② 스승의 날 행사 아이디어를 공모하려고
③ 감사 엽서 쓰기 행사 참여를 권유하려고
④　건의함 이용 방법을 안내하려고
⑤ 교실의 청결 유지를 당부하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 온실 재배의 이점
② 제철 과일의 효능
③ 친환경 병충해 예방법
④ 겨울철 식물 관리 요령
⑤ 농산물 유통 구조 개선의 필요성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 청소 업체 사장- 직원
② 인테리어 업자- 집주인
③ 부동산 중개업자- 고객
④ 페인트 가게 주인- 점원
⑤ 이삿짐 센터 직원- 의뢰인
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고
르시오.
①
③
④ ⑤
②
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to put up paintings on the wall
② to recommend some good music
③ to take brochures to the gallery
④ to buy some cookies and drinks
⑤ to send out invitations to her friends
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 식료품 가게에 다시 가려는 이유를 고르
시오.
① 잘못 구매한 식품을 환불하려고
② 두고 온 소시지를 찾아오려고
③ 영수증을 다시 발급　받으려고
④ 사은품을 받으려고
⑤ 고기를 더 사려고
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $6 ② $8 ③ $10 ④ $12 ⑤ $14
10. 대화를 듣고, 중고 서점에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것
을 고르시오.
① 위치 ② 매장 규모 ③ 개점 시간
④ 회원 혜택 ⑤ 배송료
11. Open Art Class에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것
을 고르시오.
① 지역 주민을 대상으로 한다.
② 등록비는 없다.
③ 세 시간 동안 진행된다.
④ 참가 인원 제한이 없다.
⑤ 신청은 온라인으로 해야 한다.
영어 영역 2
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
2 8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 유아용 변
기를 고르시오.
Potty Chairs
Model Design Backrest Music Price ① B-100 bear × × $34
② P-100 puppy ○ × $36
③ P-200 puppy ○ ○ $39
④ K-100 kitten × ○ $37
⑤ K-200 kitten ○ ○ $41
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① The cake I ordered will be here in time.
② I think it’s worth trying for our son, though.
③ Thank you for inviting me to your cooking class.
④ Please tell me what the cake I made tastes like.
⑤ Our son will be able to be a good cook.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Your tips surely will give me more time for reading.
② Playing sports is as important as reading books.
③ If you want, I’ll return the books to the library.
④ I’m planning to donate my old books to charity.
⑤ I forgot the due date of my book review.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jane이 Mr. Penn에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Jane:
① I’m so happy I made new friends on the field trip.
② I’m sorry, but I cannot participate in the field trip.
③ I’ll hand in the field trip report as soon as possible.
④ I keep in touch with old friends in my previous school.
⑤ I’d like you to give me some advice about the field trip.
[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① disadvantages of highheeled
shoes
② importance of warming up before working out
③ differences between indoor and outdoor sports
④ effect of regular exercise on the muscular system
⑤ need for wearing different shoes for different sports
17. 언급된 운동이 아닌 것은?
① running ② tennis ③ aerobics
④ basketball ⑤ badminton
이제 듣기·말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
We all have a tendency to look at our own flaws with a
magnifying glass. If you continually tell yourself that this or
that part of you is not up to standard, how can you expect
it to get any better? Focus on the things you like about
yourself. You will see how much better it feels to praise
yourself rather than put yourself down. With this good
feeling, you can do more for yourself and others than you
could ever do with the negative energy of selfcriticism.
Choose to see the good. The choice is yours alone.
① 자신의 결점보다는 좋은 점을 찾으라.
② 결점을 지적받으면 고치려고 노력하라.
③ 다른 사람이 하는 칭찬에 자만하지 말라.
④ 완벽함을 추구하기보다는 과정을 즐기라.
⑤ 다른 사람의 비판을 자기 발전의 계기로 삼으라.
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
I went to a local hardware store and purchased my first
barbeque. I didn’t consider the size of the box relative to
the size of my tiny car. However I tried, it wouldn’t fit.
Being new to the area, I didn’t have many people I could
call to help. As the store clerk and I stood in front of the
store scratching our heads, a man in a big pickup truck
pulled up in front of us. He too was picking up a barbeque
and without being prompted, offered to throw mine next to
his in the back of his truck and follow me home. He
wouldn’t even let me tip him. He just pulled up in my
driveway, unloaded the box, waved, and quietly drove away.
Mister, you made my week!
① worried → regretful ② frustrated → grateful
③ jealous → relieved ④ relaxed → nervous
⑤ excited → disappointed
[20 ~ 21] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
20. Soil erosion is not new. What is new is the rate of
erosion. New soil forms when the weathering of rock
exceeds losses from erosion. Throughout most of the earth’s
geological history, the result was a gradual, longterm
buildup of soil that could support vegetation. The vegetation
in turn reduced erosion and facilitated the accumulation of
topsoil. At some recent point in history, this relationship
was reversed — with soil losses from wind and water erosion
exceeding new soil formation. The world now is losing soil
at a rate of billions of tons per year, and this is reducing
the earth’s productivity. In many countries, the loss of soil
is decreasing the productivity of the land. [3점]
① excessive soil erosion and its negative effect
② increased natural rate of topsoil accumulation
③ roles of water in enhancing soil productivity
④ ways to enhance the economic value of soil
⑤　factors that facilitate fertile soil formation
영어 영역
3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
3 8
21. Researcher Jack Greenberg studied how employees from
various career sectors perceived their performance
evaluation. He found that, regardless of the industry, it was
incredibly important for employees to feel that they were
active participants in the evaluation process. The employees
were more likely to feel that the process was fair when
supervisors requested their input prior to an evaluation and
used it during the process, when there was twoway
communication during the evaluation interviews, and when
the employees had the chance to challenge the evaluation. In
other words, if the employees were involved in their
evaluation, they felt it was fairer.
① employees’ key roles in the company’s future growth
② effective strategies for selecting competent employees
③ evaluation as a means to enhance employees’ performance
④ importance of involving employees in the evaluation
process
⑤ obstacles to the communication between supervisors and
employees
[22 ~ 23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. The body is like a symphony where thousands of
metabolic actions are orchestrated into harmony through the
constant finetuning
of conscious (e.g. exercise) and
subconscious (e.g. digestion) instructions. When the harmony
is broken, the body sends us information, signals and
symptoms, in very direct and obvious ways. It is necessary
that we pay attention to these signals instead of viewing
them as burdens in our life. If we ignore or suppress health
symptoms, they will become progressively louder and more
extreme as the body attempts to capture our attention.
When the oil light comes on in our car, do we disconnect
the light, or do we take the car in for service? We usually
take our car to the shop at the first sign of trouble.
However, when it comes to our health, how many of us wait
until the situation becomes serious before taking action?
* metabolic: 신진대사의
①　Less Driving, Better Health
② Don’t Put Burdens on Your Mind
③　Listen to the Signals from Your Body
④　The Human Body: Art in Performance
⑤　The Body: The Mirror of the Personality
23. A woman in one of my seminars found that by going to
bed early she could get up at four o’clock in the morning.
She could then do the equivalent of a full day’s work by
seven or eight o’clock, before the average person even got
started. In no time at all, she was producing and earning
double the amount of her coworkers.
She was continually
promoted and paid more money because she was getting far
more done than anyone else. Successful people make a habit
of getting up early, usually by 6:00 or 6:30 in the morning,
sometimes earlier, and then getting going immediately. This
gives them a great jump on the day. The average person, on
the other hand, takes a full hour to get up and get going in
the morning. Then they drag themselves off to work,
thinking about lunchtime, and what they are going to do in
the evening.
① Put People Before Money!
② Rise Early, Be More Productive!
③ Good Health Comes from Sound Sleep
④ Failure: A Stepping Stone to Success
⑤ Slow Down and Enjoy Life
24. Derek Parra에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
In 1995, Derek Parra was the best inline skater in the
world, with eighteen world titles to his credit and a
projection of many more to come. He was the king of his
domain. However, there was a problem. Inline skating isn’t
included in the Olympics and Parra dreamed of winning an
Olympic gold medal. So, at the age of twentyfive,
he
switched to the sport of speedskating, a cousin of inline
skating but with two important differences: you race on
skates instead of wheels and on ice instead of asphalt.
There was nothing easy about the switch. Parra had grown
up in southern California and had hardly ever seen any ice,
let alone spent any time on it. Overnight, he went from
being No. 1 in the world to just somebody in the back of
the pack. However, he stuck to his goals and persisted in
making the transition, and in the 2002 Winter Olympic
Games in Salt Lake City, he won his Olympic gold medal.
① 1995년에 세계 최고의 인라인스케이트 선수였다.
② 올림픽에서 금메달 따기를 꿈꾸었다.
③ 남부 California에서 성장했다.
④ 종목을 바꾼 직후에 세계 정상의 선수가 되었다.
⑤ 2002년 동계 올림픽에서 금메달을 땄다.
영어 영역 4
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
4 8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
UK / US Students Wanting to Study Overseas
― Main Non-Academic Motives (2012)
The graph above shows the main nonacademic
motives
identified by UK and US students wanting to study overseas
in 2012. ①The number one motive for students from both
countries was to have a unique adventure. ②To travel
overseas was the second biggest motive for US students. ③
The percentage of UK students interested in starting an
international career was seventeen percentage points higher
than that of US students with the same motive. ④To improve
employment prospects was the second biggest motive for UK
students, but the least attractive to US students. ⑤The
percentage of US students who wanted to build selfconfidence
was exactly the same as that of UK students who wanted to
become selfsufficient.
26. Fire Safety Poster Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일
치하지 않는 것은?
Fire Safety Poster Contest
What do you know about fire safety? Create a
poster displaying a tip for fire prevention and
safety.
* Participants: The contest is open to all elementary
school students. Entries are for single applicants only.
Group artwork will not be accepted.
* Form: All entries must be original paintings.
Photographs are not accepted. A “short” fire safety
message must be written on the artwork.
* Deadline: March 28, 2015
The first winner will get an opportunity to ride to school
on a fire truck. All winning posters will be on display in
the City Hall.
① 개인 지원자만 작품을 제출할 수 있다.
② 작품에 사진을 포함해도 된다.
③ 작품 안에 화재 안전에 관해 짤막한 메시지를 써야 한다.
④ 1등 수상자는 소방차를 타고 학교에 갈 기회를 얻게 된다.
⑤ 수상작들은 시청에 전시될 예정이다.
27. 2015 Superhero Walkathon에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일
치하는 것은?
2015 Superhero Walkathon
The Superhero Walkathon is an annual
fundraising walking event held to support the
Active Way, a charity dedicated to granting
the wishes of terminally ill children. Come out dressed
up as your favorite superhero and be a real hero for
kids who need one.
* Date: Saturday, April 25, 2015
* Place: Green River Park
* Registration: You can register on the event date.
- $20 per person
- $10 for children aged 12 and under
* Time: Registration starts at 8:30 a.m.
Walk begins at 10:00 a.m.
Superhero capes are given to the first 200 registered
participants.
For additional information, please send an email to
patrick@activeway.org.
* cape: 망토
①　중증 노인 환자를 돕기 위한 기금 마련 행사이다.
②　행사 당일에는 등록을 받지 않는다.　
③　12세 이하 어린이는 무료로 참가할 수 있다.
④　등록은 오전 10시에 시작한다.
⑤　등록한 순서대로 200명에게 슈퍼히어로 망토를 준다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Coming home from work the other day, I saw a woman
trying to turn onto the main street and ①having very little
luck because of the constant stream of traffic. I slowed and
allowed her to turn in front of me. I was feeling pretty good
until, a couple of blocks later, she stopped to let a few more
cars into the line, causing us both to miss the next light. I
found myself completely ②irritated with her. How dare she
slow me down after I had so graciously let her into the
traffic! As I was sitting there stewing, I realized ③how
ridiculous I was being. Suddenly, a phrase I once read ④came
floating into my mind: ‘You must do him or her a kindness for
inner reasons, not because someone is keeping score or
because you will be punished if you don’t.’ I realized ⑤what I
had wanted a reward: If I do this nice thing for you, you (or
someone else) will do an equally nice thing for me.
* stew: 안달하다
영어 영역
5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
5 8
29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Igor Cerc went to a store to have a clock engraved. It
was a gift he was taking to a wedding the day he was
picking it up. However,　when he arrived at the store, ①he
found that the technician had broken the glass of the clock
during the engraving process. They offered to replace the
entire clock, after they got money from their insurance
company, but Igor needed the clock now. He realized that it
would not serve ② his goals to get upset. He calmly said
that he needed to　go to a wedding in thirty minutes; the
clock was ③ his wedding gift. He noted that there was
similar glass in other clocks in the store. Couldn’t the store
take apart another clock to fix his? He was calm and polite
throughout. “The clerk thanked me for not yelling at ④him
as other customers do,” said Igor. “I realized that he would
do everything he could for me as long as I remained polite.”
The clerk took apart another clock and quickly replaced the
glass, and Igor went on ⑤his way.
30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은? [3점]
It is often believed that an active person can make friends
more easily than a shy person, and that a conscientious
person may meet more deadlines than a person who is not
conscientious. Walter Mischel found, however, that the
typical correlation between personality traits and behavior
was quite (A) apparent / modest . This news was really
shocking, because it essentially said that the traits
personality psychologists were measuring were just slightly
better at predicting behavior than astrological signs. Mischel
did not simply point out the problem; he diagnosed the
reasons for it. He argued that personality psychologists had
(B) overestimated / underestimated the extent to which the
social situation shapes people’s behavior, independently of
their personality. To predict whether a person will meet a
deadline, for example, knowing something about the situation
may be more useful than knowing the person’s score on a
measure of conscientiousness. Situational influences can be
very powerful, sometimes (C) emphasizing / overwhelming
individual differences in personality.
* conscientious: 성실한 ** astrological sign: 점성술의 별자리
(A) (B) (C)
① apparent ··· overestimated ··· emphasizing
② apparent ··· underestimated ··· emphasizing
③ modest ··· overestimated ··· emphasizing
④ modest ··· overestimated ··· overwhelming
⑤ modest ··· underestimated ··· overwhelming
[31 ~ 33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. When the navigation app on your smartphone is telling you
the best route to the airport based on current traffic
patterns, how does it know where the traffic is? Navigation
systems are tracking your cell phone and the cell phones of
thousands of other users of the applications to see how
quickly those cell phones move through traffic. If you’re
stuck in a traffic jam, your cell phone reports the same GPS
coordinates for several minutes; if traffic is moving swiftly,
your cell phone moves as quickly as your car and these
apps can recommend routes based on that. The quality of
the overall system depends crucially on there being a large
number of users. In this respect they’re similar to
telephones, fax machines, and email:
If only one or two
people have them, they are not much good ―their utility
increases with _____________.
* coordinate: 좌표
① inventors’ ideas
② the number of users
③ the design of devices
④ the cost of production
⑤ geographical conditions
32. When scientists describe tool use by human beings, it is
usually in terms of mechanical tools. This may apply to
tools such as a sharpened flint blade or an electric drill. The
key point is that the tool is thought of as passive and with
a small number of predetermined uses. The digital revolution
has begun to change this landscape in a significant way.
Tools are now being developed with a general function in
mind, but they are not predetermined in their operations. As
a result, ___________________. For example, the personal
computer is designed for the general function of handling
and processing information, but exactly how the PC is used
is not predetermined. Therefore, for some, it may offer a
means of communication; for others, a sophisticated means
of managing accounts; and for yet others, an entertainment
platform. [3점]
* flint: 부싯돌
① you should find the merits of old inventions
② it is not possible to predict the outcome of their use
③ individual digital devices have grown smaller and cheaper
④ you should follow ethical rules when designing tools
⑤ they are not associated with mutual communication
영어 영역 6
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
6 8
33. The human brain cannot completely comprehend or
appreciate all that it encounters in its lifespan. Even if a
music lover kept his headphones on for every minute of
every day for an entire year, he wouldn’t be able to listen
to more than an eighth of all the albums that are released
just in the United States in one year. Because we do not
possess the capacity to give equal time to every artistic
product that might come our way, we must rely on
shortcuts. We may look for reviews and ratings of the latest
movies before we decide which ones we’d like to see. We
often let personal relationships guide our decisions about
what art we allow into our lives. Also, we continually rely
on the distribution systems through which we experience art
―museums, galleries, radio stations, television networks,
etc. ―to narrow the field of possibilities for us so that we
don’t have to ___________________________. [3점]
① spend all of our energy searching for the next great thing
② know how to turn our artistic talents into profits
③ create artistic products to learn about art
④ satisfy our deeply rooted hunger for art
⑤ avoid buying musical instruments online
34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
In an astonishing example of how nurturing can influence
nature, there is considerable evidence confirming that how
parents emotionally respond to their children can encourage
or suppress genetic tendencies. Biology is not destiny, so
gene expression is not necessarily inevitable. To produce
their effects, genes must be turned on. (A) , shyness
is a trait that seems to be partially hereditary. If parents
are overprotective of their shy young daughter, the toddler
is likely to remain shy. However, if they encourage her to
interact with other toddlers, she may overcome it.
(B) , genetic tendencies toward intelligence, sociability,
and aggression can be stimulated, controlled, or suppressed
by parental response and other environmental influences.
(A) (B)
① For example ··· Thus
② For example ··· However
③ Nevertheless ··· Thus
④ Nevertheless ··· Similarly
⑤ As a result ··· However
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Animals may have a limited understanding of what is
happening now, but only humans seem to enrich their
understanding of the present by thoughtful links to events in
the distant past and future. Indeed, human goals often link
what one does now to possible outcomes that lie years
away. ①Thus, human action is not just a hereandnow
response but is often designed to help bring about something
far off, such as graduation or marriage or retirement. ② It
can also be linked to things that have happened elsewhere
or long ago, such as when people celebrate Independence
Day or a religious holiday. ③ Moreover, people often follow
the rules made in distant places by people they will never
meet. ④Different societies make different rules, so it’s hard
to say which rules are more natural than others. ⑤ Most
Americans pay income tax, for example, though few have
any direct contact with the people who make the tax laws.
[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Sir Edward C. BurneJones
was a prominent
nineteenthcentury
English artist. One day he was invited
to dinner at the home of his daughter.
(A) The next morning, he arrived at his daughter’s home
with paints and palette. He went to the wall where the
little girl had been forced to stand, and there he painted
pictures ―a kitten chasing its tail, lambs in a field, and
goldfish swimming.
(B) As a special treat, his young granddaughter was allowed
to come to the table; she misbehaved, and her mother
made her stand in the corner with her face to the wall.
Sir Edward, a welltrained
grandfather, did not interfere
with his grandchild’s training.
(C) He decorated the wall on both sides of that corner with
paintings for his granddaughter’s delight. If she had to
stand in the corner again, at least she would have
something to look at.
① (A) －(C) －(B) ② (B) － (A) －(C)
③ (B) －(C) －(A) ④ (C) － (A) －(B)
⑤ (C) －(B) －(A)
영어 영역
7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
7 8
37.
Mass customization is a strategy that allows
manufacturers or retailers to provide individualized
products to consumers. Today’s apparel supplier must
look for new ways to offer customers topquality
goods
at highly competitive prices.
(A) The customer then receives the finished product in a
very short time. This technological strategy is used
today by some fashion firms. This type of customization
is often limited, however, to a small number of
customers.
(B) Based on the exact image, body scanning software then
defines and captures all the measurements necessary for
actually producing the garment or shoe. This data is
forwarded online to the manufacturer, whose production
technologies ensure an exact fit.
(C) Consumers desire products that can be personalized
through fit preferences, color selection, fabric choices,
or design characteristics. A solution to the fit
preference is a body or foot scanner that takes a
customer’s measurements digitally, creating what is
referred to as digital twin. [3점]
* apparel: 의류
① (A) －(C) －(B) ② (B) －(A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) －(A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가
장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
For example, if you say “I’m going to the bank to deposit
some money,” I don’t expect you to go to the river bank.
Often, a word is used with more than one meaning. Indeed,
a brief look at a dictionary will show you that the majority of
words are used with more than one meaning. ( ① ) If such
words were said to be ambiguous, then the vast majority of
words would be ambiguous. ( ② ) However, linguists and
philosophers usually call a word “ambiguous” only when there
is some uncertainty about which meaning is being used in the
particular instance. ( ③ ) A word isn’t ambiguous by itself but
is used ambiguously: it is ambiguous when one cannot tell from
the context what sense is being used. ( ④ ) However, in most
cases one can tell from the context what sense is being
used. ( ⑤ ) The word “bank” has these two senses (and more),
but it is not thereby ambiguous: the two senses are so
unrelated that no one is likely to confuse them.
39.
Reading has also always had a social dimension, however,
as it does in our early lives: our first acts of reading are
performed with parents and teachers standing by and
guiding us.
When we read, we are alone. Reading calls us to our sole
self, and away from the world of distractions; but it also
furnishes us with farreaching
connections to other people.
( ① ) The peaceful calm of a desert island is not a bad
image to have in your head as you prepare to read. ( ② )
No earthly storms can reach you here; you are safe. ( ③ )
The desert island image reinforces the idea that reading is a
fundamentally solitary experience. ( ④ ) These mentors left
their stamp on how we approach a text; they gave us the
tools we use to get closer to the words on the page. ( ⑤ )
There is, of course, another social connection in reading: we
always converse, by implication, with the book’s author.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
The main reason you’re drawn to novel or surprising
things is that it could upset the safe, predictable status
quo and even threaten your survival. If you’ve ever tried
to carry on a conversation in a room in which a TV is
playing, you know that it’s hard not to glance at the
screen occasionally. Even if you don’t want to watch,
your brain is attracted by that constantly shifting stream
of images, because change can have lifeordeath
consequences. Indeed, if our early African ancestors
hadn’t been good at fixing all their attention on the
justripened
fruit or the approaching predators, we
wouldn’t be here. For the same reason, a strong
sensitivity to the odd detail that doesn’t quite correspond
with the way things usually are or ought to be is a
major asset for a soldier in a war zone. Even in
everyday situations, you can’t afford to miss that
jaywalker darting in front of your car or the single new
and important fact in a long, boring list.
* status quo: 현재의 상황 ** jaywalker: 무단 횡단자
󰀻
We are sensitive to (A) because that sensitivity
gives advantages for our (B) .
(A) (B)
① change ··· safety
② change ··· creativity
③ criticism ··· intelligence
④ criticism ··· safety
⑤ beauty ··· creativity
영어 영역 8
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
8 8
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Blood pressure has to rise when we get out of bed in
the morning, so that there is enough blood flow to the
brain to keep us from fainting. When we sit down to
read the morning newspaper, it goes down again. There
is not a single, ideal level of blood pressure that our
body tries to maintain. At the same time, it is obviously
not to our benefit for blood pressure to get too low or
too high, and there are mechanisms in place to keep it
within a limited range.
I believe that a similar process occurs with human
emotions. It is to people’s advantage to react emotionally
to their environments, such that emotions vary from
moment to moment. It is also to people’s advantage to
have mechanisms in place to keep them away from the
emotional extremes.
Think, for example, about the last time you
experienced a state of happiness. Maybe it was the day
you were married, or the day your child was born. You
probably experienced a wave of pleasure rushing through
your body. Your heart was beating rapidly, your blood
pressure went up, and you were short of breath. Now
imagine what it would be like to feel this way for an
hour, a day, or a week. Sounds exhausting, doesn’t it?
positive (or negative) emotions might have
psychological costs, making it difficult to concentrate and
to notice new emotional information.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Pleasure Is Determined by What You Think
② A Sound Mind Rests in a Sound Body
③ Our Emotions Are Like Blood Pressure
④ Positive Emotions Can Lower Blood Pressure
⑤ Blood Pressure: The Indicator of Your Health
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Unexpected ② Varied ③ Prolonged
④ Intended ⑤ Copied
[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Justin wished that his dad had a different job. It
sounded so cool to say, “My dad is at the office!”
However, Justin’s dad sold plastic souvenirs to tourists
from a street stall. When other kids asked him, “What
does your dad do for a living?” he always said, “(a) He
is in business.” Then he would quickly change the
subject before anyone could ask details about the kind of
business in which his dad was involved.
(B)
His dad smiled. “Ever since your sixth birthday, I’ve
put Saturdays’ earnings into a savings account for you.
Now you can study at a college of your choice.” Justin
felt a lump in his throat. “Thanks, Dad! I’ll work hard,”
he promised. “I’ll get a degree and a good job and then
(b) you won’t have to stand on windy street corners to
sell your stuff any longer.” His dad gave him a warm
hug.
(C)
He was also upset that his dad had to work on
Saturdays. (c) He was never free to watch Justin play in
soccer matches. The other dads would stand on the
sidelines, cheering their sons, but his dad only said,
“Enjoy the game, Justin! I wish I could be there to see
you score the winning goal!” In the final match of the
final season, when he had been voted man of the match,
his dad wasn’t there to see it.
(D)
Justin dreamed of going to college one day, but (d) he
thought it was an impossible goal. Yet he prayed about it
regularly. On his seventeenth birthday, his dad handed
him a big envelope. ‘What could be inside?’ he wondered.
He hoped for money to buy new sneakers. But inside the
envelope was a file of documents. “What’s this?” he
asked. “Those are application forms for college,” his dad
answered. “You can look through them and tell (e) me
which course you want to take.” “But where will the
money come from?” Justin asked, surprised.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 Justin에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 아버지의 직업을 알리고 싶어 하지 않았다.
② 아버지께 대학 학위를 따겠다고 약속했다.
③ 토요일에도 아버지께서 일하러 가시는 것을 싫어했다.
④ 축구 시합에 늘 응원하러 나오시는 아버지께 감사했다.
⑤ 아버지에게서 대학 입학 지원서를 받았다.
※ 확인 사항 ◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.

1
8
2016학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, I’ll buy that raincoat.
② No. I’ll bring her an umbrella.
③ Wow. The weather is so clear.
④ Good. We should come home early.
⑤ I agree. Let’s go and eat out tonight.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good. I’ll take the class.
② Sure. I’ll bring my textbook.
③ Okay. You can leave a message.
④ You’re right. The meeting was successful.
⑤ That’s true. But I thought it was tomorrow.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 동물 꼬리의 다양한 기능
② 희귀 동물 보호의 필요성
③ 동물들의 다양한 의사소통 방법
④ 곤충류 날개와 조류 날개의 차이점
⑤ 날개의 기능과 꼬리 기능의 유사성
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 독서는 학업 성적을 향상시킨다.
② 글쓰기는 정서 발달을 촉진한다.
③ 토론 수업은 말하기 능력을 신장시킨다.
④ 올바른 독서 습관은 유년기에 형성된다.
⑤ 문학 작품 읽기는 상상력 향상에 도움이 된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 가수 － 매니저 ② 작가 － 출판사 직원
③ 영화감독 － 기자 ④ 관광객 － 관광 가이드
⑤ 출연자 － 연출가
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to contact a band
② to reserve a restaurant
③ to pick up a wedding dress
④ to send out invitations
⑤ to make a cake
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 변경된 날에 역사 유적지 탐방을 갈 수
없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 가족 여행을 가야 해서
② 지리 숙제를 해야 해서
③ 뮤지컬 예행연습이 있어서
④ 할머니 생신 잔치에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 수해 복구 봉사 활동에 참여해야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $63 ② $72 ③ $90 ④ $99 ⑤ $110
10. 대화를 듣고, Blood Donor Day에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지
않은 것을 고르시오.
① 날짜 ② 슬로건 ③ 장소
④ 참여 자격 ⑤ 증정품
11. Art Museum Fair에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오.
① 1995년에 시작되었다.
② 지역 예술가를 후원하는 행사이다.
③ 매년 가을에 개최된다.
④ 입장료는 20달러이다.
⑤ 민속춤 공연을 포함한다.
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 냉장고를
고르시오.
Refrigerators on Sale
Model Price Storage
(liters) Type Warranty
(years)
① A $1,100 850 Four-door 3
② B $900 750 Four-door 2
③ C $800 650 Four-door 3
④ D $700 650 Two-door 3
⑤ E $500 450 Two-door 2
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Yes. It’s very time-consuming, but it’s worth it.
② I’m sorry that I didn’t clean up my room yet.
③ That’s why I parked my car in the garage.
④ Yeah. A garage sale can save your time.
⑤ I didn’t get my newspaper today, either.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① You sing the songs beautifully.
② I’ll give you my phone number.
③ Just thinking of it makes me happy.
④ I’m sorry to hear that you’re leaving.
⑤ Let’s go and get our tickets refunded.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Matilda가 Tony에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Matilda: Tony,
① swimming is a popular sport.
② your temperature isn’t that high.
③ teamwork will win the competition.
④ you should get ready for practice now.
⑤ the most important thing is your health.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 홍보 자료 제작 협조를 요청하려고
② 전공 체험 프로그램을 안내하려고
③ 대학 내 편의 시설을 소개하려고
④ 수강 신청 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 입학 지원 자격을 알려주려고
17. 언급된 학과가 아닌 것은?
① Economics ② Biology ③ Sociology
④ Chemistry ⑤ Architecture
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Mr. Johnson,
I would like to thank you for approving my request that
the company pay for my college tuition. Today, Human
Resources informed me that you had signed my request for
payment. I want to tell you that this financial relief will
make a great difference in my life. Now, I can focus more
on my job. This will enable me to perform better at my
work and contribute more to the company. Once again, I
appreciate your support of my tuition and your faith in me.
Sincerely,
Warwick Smith
* Human Resources: 인사 부서
① 학비 지원 승인에 감사하려고
② 대학 입학 추천서를 부탁하려고
③ 장학금 신청 자격을 문의하려고
④ 급여 인상 계획 승인을 요청하려고
⑤ 업무 효율성 향상 방안을 제안하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Gabby의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Stepping up to the microphone, Gabby could feel the sweat
starting to run down her face and neck. She tried to take a deep
breath, but couldn’t. As her name was called, Gabby became
more afraid of speaking before a large audience. Then, she
suddenly remembered the words of a woman who had gradually
overcome the same fear: “Fear, rapid heartbeat, quick breathing,
and sweating are simply the body’s declaration that we are ready
to fight.” Recalling this, Gabby calmed down and remembered
clearly what she had to say. Assured, Gabby smiled and started
to deliver her speech. The words flowed out like water, and
her beating heart gave her more and more mental strength.
The performance was successful. She had overcome her fear.
① hopeful → scared ② indifferent → refreshed
③ jealous → delighted ④ anxious → confused
⑤ worried → confident
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Planning involves only the half of your brain that controls
your logical thinking. The other intuitive half of your brain
is left out of this planning process. If you insist on always
having a plan, you cut yourself off from your intuitive self
and the inner joy it provides. To break planning addiction,
allow yourself one freedom. Decide to spend a day exploring
a park or a neighborhood with curiosity as your only guide.
The next time you feel attracted to someone, and want to
introduce yourself, go ahead. You’ll be likely to make a new
friend. By giving yourself freedom to follow your intuition,
you develop your sensitivity to your inner voice. You learn to
hear the quiet messages that can make your life an adventure.
① 내면의 즐거움을 얻기 위해 친구를 많이 사귀어라.
② 학습 계획을 수립할 때는 시간 배분을 적절히 해라.
③ 사고력 향상을 위해 가능한 한 산책 시간을 늘려라.
④ 새로운 모험을 시작하기 전에 주변 사람들과 상의해라.
⑤ 계획 수립에 얽매이지만 말고 때로는 직관에 따라 행동해라.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
[21～22] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
21. Although the Internet seems truly global these days,
less than half of the world’s population has access to
it. Some four billion people are still unconnected. This
spring, IT engineers will begin to shift to the next phase
in a grand plan to bring the Internet to everyone. Their
goal is to establish a network of high-altitude balloons
that will rain 4G LTE signals down to anyone with a
4G device. Regional telecom companies will transmit the
signals to the balloons, and then each balloon will relay
the signals to a ground area many miles in diameter. In
this way, farmers in remote areas will be able to access
weather data, and rural children will be able to pursue
online educations. By the end of the year, the engineers
aim to have 100 balloons about 13 miles up.
* altitude: 높이, 고도
① Balloons for Weather Forecasting
② Balloons to Connect the World
③ A One-Day Tour in a Balloon
④ Online Education for Farmers
⑤ 4G: The Fastest Connection
22. Inflation can be a major life concern for most people.
It makes it difficult for households to plan ahead. This is
because ‘future problems’ concerning inflation often make
us change our plans for the future. For instance, how
much should the parents of a newborn start regularly
saving to pay for her college education? If inflation
averages two percent, prices roughly double every thirty-six
years. But if inflation gets up to eight percent, prices
roughly double every nine years. A Harvard education
that currently costs $100,000 may therefore end up costing
half a million dollars for an infant born today. Millions
of workers who retired with pensions during the 1960s
and 1970s found that inflation pushed up costs far beyond
their expected expenses. Many had to reenter the workforce
just to make ends meet.
① What Causes Inflation?
② Inflation Affects Future Plans
③ Various Ways to Reduce the Inflation Rate
④ Actual Benefits Exceed Estimated Expenses
⑤ How Quickly Can the Inflation Rate Climb?
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Tourism is important for more than just vacationing.
Tourism allows people from different places and cultures
to come together, and then tourists and host communities
learn about each other’s differences and similarities. They
also learn new tastes and ways of thinking, which may
lead to a better understanding between hosts and tourists.
Another positive effect of tourism is the aid it provides
for the survival of a society’s culture, especially the
culture’s art forms. The opportunity to sell native artworks
to tourists or perform folk dances for them may encourage
local artists to preserve traditional art forms. For example,
Fijians have developed their palm mat and shell jewelry
crafts into profitable tourist businesses. They also earn
additional income by performing folk dances and fire
walking.
① misunderstandings between hosts and tourists
② various ways of creating tourism products
③ negative effects of cultural exchanges
④ disappearance of traditional cultures
⑤ cultural benefits of tourism
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Distribution of Time Spent per Shopping App Category
The above graph shows the distribution of time spent by
consumers using shopping apps across various shopping
app categories in December 2011 and December 2012. ① Of
the six categories, Retailer apps saw the greatest increase in
the share of time spent, from 15% in December 2011 to
27% in December 2012. ② On the other hand, the share of
time spent with Online Marketplace apps decreased from
25% in December 2011 to 20% in December 2012. ③ The
Purchase Assistant app share decreased by one percentage
point from December 2011 to December 2012. ④ The share
of Price Comparison apps in December 2011 was the same
as that in December 2012. ⑤ Daily Deal apps showed the
smallest share of time spent in both December 2011 and
December 2012.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. 교황 Julius Ⅱ의 무덤에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
The project of creating the tomb of Pope Julius Ⅱ was
originally given to Michelangelo in 1505, but the tomb
was not completed until 1545. It was designed by
Michelangelo himself as the pope requested. The design
called for some 40 statues, and the tomb was to be a
giant structure. Just less than a year after the initial work
on the tomb began, it stopped because of lack of funds.
When Pope Julius Ⅱ died in 1513, he left money for the
completion of his tomb, so Michelangelo started work
again. After some years of carving, he completed Moses,
one of the most famous statues of the tomb. However,
the next pope, Leo X, had little interest in continuing the
project. As time went on, its scale was reduced, and the
project for the tomb was revised again and again.
① Michelangelo가 디자인했다.
② 자금 부족으로 작업이 중단된 적이 있다.
③ Moses는 무덤의 가장 유명한 조각상 중 하나이다.
④ 교황 Leo X는 프로젝트를 지속하는 것에 관심이 많았다.
⑤ 프로젝트는 여러 차례 수정되었다.
26. 2015 National Essay Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
① 주제가 정해져 있지 않다.
② 대학생을 대상으로 한다.
③ 1인당 1편의 에세이만 제출할 수 있다.
④ 수상자는 2015년 7월 15일에 발표된다.
⑤ 에세이는 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.
27. Eugene Farm Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
① 오전 10시부터 오후 4시까지 진행된다.
② 오후에 치즈 만드는 법을 배울 수 있다.
③ 입장료에는 점심 값이 포함되어 있다.
④ 2세 이하는 무료로 입장할 수 있다.
⑤ 예약을 하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
An independent artist is probably the one ① who lives
closest to an unbounded creative situation. Many artists
have considerable freedom from external requirements
about what to do, how to do it, when to do it, and why.
At the same time, however, we know that artists usually
limit themselves quite ② forcefully by choice of material
and form of expression. To make the choice to express a
feeling by carving a specific form from a rock, without
the use of high technology or colors, ③ restricting the
artist significantly. Such choices are not made to limit
creativity, but rather to cultivate ④ it. When everything is
possible, creativity has no tension. Creativity is strange in
that it finds its way in any kind of situation, no matter
how restricted, just as the same amount of water flows
faster and stronger through a narrow strait ⑤ than across
the open sea.
* strait: 해협
Eugene Farm Tour
Are you looking for somewhere special to go for the
weekend? Come and visit Eugene Farm, and enjoy our
beautiful fields, barns, and cheese shop.
Tour Schedule
∙The tour will run from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Sunday, June 14, 2015.
- Morning: See a wide variety of crops and animals.
- Lunch (12:30 p.m. ― 1:30 p.m.): Everything we serve
is grown on our farm!
- Afternoon: Visit our cheese shop, and you can learn
how to make cheese!
Admission Fee (lunch included)
∙$30 for 11 & older
∙$20 for children aged 3 to 10
∙Free for 2 & under
Reservation
∙Reservations are required, and must be made on
our website (www.eugenefarm.com) by 6:00 p.m.,
Thursday, June 11, 2015.
2015 National Essay Contest
The Evergreen Foundation is excited to call for
submissions for the 2015 National Essay Contest! This
contest is designed to encourage high school students to
become more aware of the importance of our environment.
Contest Theme
∙How can we preserve our forests?
Requirements & Submission Guidelines
∙High school students only
∙Only one essay per student
∙Essays must be between 1,500 and 2,000 words.
∙Due by July 15, 2015
We will announce the winners of this year’s contest
on August 15, 2015.
Only essays submitted by email will be accepted.
(email: 2015essay@evergreeners.org)
For more information, visit www.evergreeners.org.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
The desert locust lives in two remarkably different
styles depending on the availability of food sources and
the density of the local locust population. When food is
scarce, as it usually is in their native desert habitat,
locusts are born with coloring designed for camouflage
and lead (A) solitary / social lives. But when rare periods
of significant rain produce major vegetation growth,
everything changes. At first, the locusts continue to be
loners, just feasting off the (B) insufficient / abundant
food supply. But as the extra vegetation starts to die
off, the locusts find themselves crowded together.
Suddenly, baby locusts are born with bright colors and a
preference for company. Instead of avoiding one another
and hiding from predators through camouflage and
inactivity, these locusts gather in vast groups, feed
together, and (C) overwhelm / overestimate their predators
simply through numbers.
* camouflage: 위장
(A) (B) (C)
① solitary …… insufficient …… overwhelm
② solitary …… abundant …… overwhelm
③ solitary …… insufficient …… overestimate
④ social …… abundant …… overwhelm
⑤ social …… insufficient …… overestimate
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Ellie walked to school in her new shoes. “I like those,”
Megan whispered. “Cool.” Ellie felt happy. ① She knew
it was hard to get compliments from Megan and couldn’t
hide her smile. The two friends had desks side by side at
the back. “Stop talking, you two,” said Miss Smith.
“Bring your books to me if you’ve finished.” Ellie
followed Megan to the front of the class. ② She always
let Megan go first. She felt scared when Miss Smith
was upset. Miss Smith noticed ③ her new shoes. “Those
aren’t suitable for school,” she said, her voice cold. Ellie
took a deep breath. “The shop didn’t have black shoes,
Miss Smith,” ④ she said. Her voice came out in a
whisper. “The school uniform requires black or dark blue
shoes,” said Miss Smith. “Report to me in proper shoes,
please. On Monday.” ⑤ She used her quiet-shout voice
and Ellie shivered.
* shiver: 떨다
[31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. In an increasingly globalized world, literature in
translation has an especially important role. Increasingly,
writers, readers, and publishers are turning to literature as
a bridge between cultures, particularly Western and Arab
societies. This growing interest is, in turn, driving a
boom in translation. However, not surprisingly perhaps,
most translations are from English into other languages,
not from another language, such as Arabic, into English.
Hence, the huge American market is seen as driving the
. Bookstores in the United States, for example,
rarely stock more than Nobel Prize winner Naguib
Mahfouz’s Cairo Trilogy, a masterful, realistic account of
life in Cairo and of a merchant family in the mid-20th
century. Western readers likely know little of Mahfouz’s
more experimental work, his political and religious
allegories, or his historical dramas. The result is a kind
of one-way mirror between America and the rest of the
world. [3점]
* allegory: 우화, 풍자
① equality ② diversity ③ interaction
④ imbalance ⑤ uncertainty
32. We tend to assume that the way to get more time is
to speed up. But speeding up can actually slow us down.
Anyone who has ever rushed out of the house only to
realize that their keys and wallet are sitting on the
kitchen table knows this only too well. And it’s not just our
efficiency that is reduced. The quality of the experience
suffers too, as we become less aware or ‘mindful.’ Have
you ever eaten an entire meal without tasting any of it?
Hurrying up doesn’t just give us less time, it can also
steal the pleasure and benefit from the time that we do
have. For many of us, hurrying is a way of life. Some
of us enjoy the thrill that it gives us while others are
driven crazy by the constant pressure and feel that their
lives are speeding up to an unacceptable degree. Either
way, there are almost certainly areas of our life that
could be . [3점]
① affected by temporary sufferings
② disturbed by inconsistent behaviors
③ enhanced by a little go-slow behavior
④ complicated by slow-but-steady actions
⑤ dominated by a little speedy decision making
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. The audience receives a sound signal entirely through
the vibrations generated in the air, whereas in a singer
some of the auditory stimulus is conducted to the ear
through the singer’s own bones. Since these two ways of
transferring sound have quite different relative efficiencies
at various frequencies, the overall quality of the sound
will be quite different. You have probably experienced this
when you have listened to your own voice, as on tape or
through a public address system. It is easy to blame the
‘sound of a stranger’ on ‘poor electronics,’ but this is
only partly justified. The major effect comes from the fact
that you hear yourself differently from the way others hear
you. This is one of the main reasons why even the most
accomplished singers have to listen to the opinion of
coaches and voice teachers as to ‘how they sound,’ whereas
no concert violinist would have to do such a thing. To the
violinist
to someone else standing nearby. [3점]
* frequency: 주파수
① the coaches are more helpful than they are
② sounds spread a lot more widely than they do
③ the audience response is just as important as it is
④ playing sounds almost exactly the same as it does
⑤ the ‘sound of a stranger’ matters more than it does
34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Problems can be distinguished according to whether
they are reasonable or unreasonable. Reasonable problems
are of the kind that can be solved in a step-by-step
manner. A crossword puzzle is of this nature. Given a
sufficient vocabulary, the empty spaces can be filled in
one by one. Unreasonable problems, (A) , cannot be
treated this way because the task contains some ‘trick’ or
‘catch’ that must be understood before someone can
arrive at a solution. This feature frustrates any step-by-step
process that proceeds without the realization that “things
aren’t what they seem.” (B) , successful problem
solving in these cases requires that the person acquire an
insight into the nature of the trick. Riddles provide
commonplace instances of such insight problems, such as
the classic riddle that the Sphinx posed to Oedipus.
(A) (B)
① in contrast …… Hence
② in contrast …… Nevertheless
③ for example …… Hence
④ for example …… Besides
⑤ in addition …… Nevertheless
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
School physical education programs should offer a
balanced variety of activities that allow young people to
develop ability in lifetime activities that are personally
meaningful and enjoyable. A balance should exist in
any physical education program among team, dual,
and individual (lifetime) sports. ① Team sports such as
basketball and soccer provide an opportunity for students
to develop skills and to enjoy working and competing
together as a team. ② However, in many school physical
education programs, team sports dominate the curriculum
at the expense of various individual and dual sports, like
tennis, swimming, badminton, and golf. ③ In such cases,
the students lose the opportunity to develop skills in
activities that they can participate in throughout their
adult lives. ④ Baseball, in particular, is one of the most
popular sports frequently broadcast on TV. ⑤ Only through
a balanced program of team, dual, and individual sports
is it possible to develop well-rounded individuals.
* dual: 둘의
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Cultural characteristics are not only passed from
parents to children, but may be passed on from any one
individual to another by word of mouth or by writing.
(A) Like those infectious diseases, cultural habits such as
pop music preferences and clothing fashions may
spread very quickly nowadays, especially through the
media of radio and television.
(B) So some cultural changes may be adopted quite
quickly by a whole population. Transmission of
culture is rather like transmission of an infection. Flu
and colds spread very quickly, especially with the
large amount of contact that people now have with
each other.
(C) However, other deep-rooted cultural characteristics of
races and racial subgroups are much more difficult to
change. These are the cultural patterns that are so
resistant to alteration that they have the appearance
of being inherent.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
The timing of positive versus negative behavior seems
to influence attraction. Several studies have identified
what has been called the loss-gain effect.
(A) Studies suggest that you would not. In fact, people
are more attracted to individuals who are consistently
negative than to people who initially behave positively
and then switch to negative behavior.
(B) The reason is this: people who start out being nice
get our hopes up, so the letdown we experience
when we discover that they are not nice makes it
worse than if they had acted badly from the start.
(C) This effect reflects what happens to attraction when a
person’s behavior moves from positive to negative or
from negative to positive. For example, if someone
seemed very nice to you early in the interaction, but
then began to act like a fool, would you be more
attracted to that person than if that person were a
fool from the start?
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
The spoonful of 95℃ soup hitting your foot hurts, but
not as badly as it would if you accidentally spilled the
entire pot of 95℃ soup on your foot.
Heat and temperature are two quantities that can be
easily confused. Imagine cooking a very large pot of
chicken soup on the stove. Let’s suppose you heat the
soup until it is 95℃, quite hot. ( ① ) You grab a spoon
and take out a spoonful of soup to taste. ( ② ) As you
remove the spoonful of soup from the pot, it has the
same temperature as the larger sample. ( ③ ) Unfortunately,
as you bring the soup towards your mouth to taste it, the
spoon slips from your hand, pouring its contents on your
bare foot. ( ④ ) If both the spoonful and the pot full of
soup have the same temperature, why would the larger
sample cause more damage if it came in contact with
your skin? ( ⑤ ) The answer to the question lies in the
difference between temperature and heat.
39.
They quickly pick out a whole series of items of the
same type, making a handful of, say, small screws.
People make extensive use of searching images. One
unexpected context is sorting. Suppose you have a bag of
small hardware ― screws, nails, and so on ― and you
decide to organize them into little jars. You dump the
stuff out on a table and begin separating the items into
coherent groups. ( ① ) It is possible to do this by
randomly picking up individual objects, one by one,
identifying each one, and then moving it to the
appropriate jar. ( ② ) But what most people do is very
different. ( ③ ) They put them in the jar and then go
back and do the same for a different kind of item. ( ④ )
So the sorting sequence is nonrandom, producing runs of
items of a single type. ( ⑤ ) It is a faster, more
efficient technique, and much of the increased efficiency
is due to the use of searching images. [3점]
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
There are two types of managers in business
organizations: functional managers and project managers.
Both types of managers have different roles and
qualities. Functional managers head one of a firm’s
departments such as marketing or engineering, and they
are specialists in the area they manage. They are skilled
at breaking the components of a system into smaller
elements, knowing something of the details of each
operation for which they are responsible. On the other
hand, project managers begin their career as specialists
in some field. When promoted to the position of project
manager, they must transform from technical caterpillar
to generalist butterfly. They oversee many functional
areas, each with its own specialists. Therefore, what is
required is an ability to put many pieces of a task
together to form a coherent whole. Thus, to understand
a frog, for example, functional managers cut it open to
examine it, but project managers watch it swim with
other frogs and consider the environment.
* caterpillar: 애벌레
󰀻
In business organizations, compared with the functional
managers who generally (A) what forms a system,
project managers focus on (B) all of its elements.
(A) (B)
① analyze …… splitting
② analyze …… combining
③ modify …… distributing
④ assemble …… dividing
⑤ assemble …… blending
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
It isn’t going to be easy making changes to the food
your children eat, and even the most careful, patient
parents will probably find that the little ones will resist
at some point and to some degree. The problem is that
many of us were forced to eat in a healthy way as
children: we learned the hard way. And the temptation
to continue with these parental habits with our own
children is strong.
If you were made to sit at the table until you had
cleaned your plate, you are not alone: most of the adult
population have suffered this at some point ― at school
if not at home. Forcing your children to eat, especially
if they don’t like what is on the plate, is completely
. “Sit there until you finish” may be
how we learned, and may also be the only way you feel
able to achieve your goal, but think about it: the
experience of eating a pile of unwanted cabbage until
they feel sick is hardly going to make children jump for
joy the next time it is served.
This strict approach is very old-fashioned, and you
may win the battle but you definitely won’t win the
war. Delaying puddings used to be thought of as a good
idea too, but guess what? That doesn’t work either. “No
pudding until you have finished your main course” was
the standard line when most parents of today were
young and is still commonly used, but it only makes
sweet things seem more desirable.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Do Old Feeding Habits Work?
② No More Instant Foods for Kids
③ Kids Today Need Table Manners
④ Time to Switch to Organic Food!
⑤ Homemade Pudding Makes Us Perfect
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① counterproductive ② beneficial ③ invaluable
④ unconventional ⑤ constructive
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
In 1887, when the land was up for sale, grandpa
bought two hundred acres from the Granger family. In
1918, (a) he bought another two hundred. It was good
rich land. However, there were bank loans for and taxes on
the land. Unfortunately, there had not been enough money
from the cotton to pay both of them and live on. To
make things worse, the price of cotton dropped in 1930.
(B)
Some of it belonged to Stacey, Christopher, and John,
not to mention the part that belonged to big mama and
mama. However, papa never divided the land in his mind;
it was simply the land of our family. For it, (b) he would
work the long, hot summer pounding steel; mama would
teach and run the farm; and big mama, in her sixties,
would work like a woman in her twenties in the cotton
fields and keep the house; but always, the taxes would be
paid. Papa said that one day I would understand.
(C)
When he came back from Louisiana, I asked papa
why he had to go away and why the land was so
important. (c) He took my hand and said in his quiet
way: “Look out there, Cassie. All that belongs to you.
You will never have to live on other people’s land. As
long as the family survives, you will have your own
place. That’s important. You may not understand now,
but one day you will.” I looked at papa strangely, for I
knew that all the land did not belong to me.
(D)
That was why papa had gone to work, ending up in
Louisiana in 1931. (d) He set out looking for work, first
going far north and south, and finally west into Louisiana.
It was there he found work laying track for the railroad.
He worked the remainder of the year away from us, not
returning until the deep winter. The following spring after
the planting was finished, (e) he did the same. Now it
was 1933, and papa was again in Louisiana laying track.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① ‘grandpa’는 1887년에 200에이커의 땅을 샀다.
② 1930년에 면화 가격이 하락했다.
③ ‘big mama’는 60대에 목화밭 일을 하지 않았다.
④ ‘I’는 ‘papa’에게 왜 그 땅이 중요한지 물었다.
⑤ ‘papa’는 Louisiana에서 철로를 놓는 일을 한 적이 있다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① They’ll be done in an hour.
② They were ready yesterday.
③ Let’s see if they’re my pants.
④ I tried, but I couldn’t fix them.
⑤ They’ll go shopping tomorrow.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m glad you love my new menu.
② Too many cooks won’t be helpful.
③ I’ll order more tomatoes for the dinner.
④ That’s too bad. The tomatoes aren’t fresh.
⑤ I’m sorry. I’ll call and change the order now.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 달리기 대회를 홍보하려고
② 수질 오염 문제를 알리려고
③ 달리기의 장점을 설명하려고
④ 강변 공원 개장을 안내하려고
⑤ 자선 행사 도우미를 모집하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 놀이는 아동의 학습 동기를 높인다.
② 뮤지컬 관람은 예술적 감수성을 높인다.
③ 취미 생활은 스트레스 해소에 유익하다.
④ 뮤지컬 수업은 아동의 자신감을 키워 준다.
⑤ 수업 시 아동의 흥미를 고려할 필요가 있다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 축구 코치－선수 ② 작곡가－지휘자
③ 영화 감독－소설가 ④ 사진 작가－영화 배우
⑤ 상담 교사－학생
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 여행 책자 보내기 ② 항공권 예약하기
③ 여행 일자 확인하기 ④ 호텔 정보 검색하기
⑤ 관광 가이드 구하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지하철을 이용하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 자동차 연료비가 올라서 ② 교통 체증을 피하려고
③ 자동차가 고장 나서 ④ 환경을 보호하려고
⑤ 운동량을 늘리려고
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $36 ② $45 ③ $50 ④ $63 ⑤ $70
10. 대화를 듣고, 현장 학습에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 활동 종류 ② 예약 인원 ③ 날짜
④ 결제 수단 ⑤ 준비 물품
11. Bamboo Pond Restaurant에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치
하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 중국의 Beijing에 위치하고 있다.
② 건축하는 데 2년 이상이 걸렸다.
③ 공연장에서 전통 쇼가 매일 열린다.
④ 아이들이 놀 수 있는 공간이 있다.
⑤ 200명의 요리사를 고용하고 있다.
제3교시
1
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 수업을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Sure. Let’s encourage more students to sign up.
② Perfect! Please tell me how I can contact him.
③ Perhaps we should just cancel the contest.
④ Unfortunately, I cannot change the topic.
⑤ Terrific! You’ll be the best judge ever.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Good for you. You’re going to major in robotics.
② I’m sorry. I can’t participate in volunteer activities.
③ That’s too bad. You really wanted to attend the lecture.
④ In fact, I already taught what he talked about yesterday.
⑤ That’s okay. I was happy to help out at the nursing home.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jessica가 Brian에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jessica:
① You can help me run my own blog.
② You’re the most competent manager.
③ Your blog is helpful to fix the problem.
④ You shouldn’t blame your team members.
⑤ You should focus on your work in the office.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 교육 매체의 보급 현황
② 광고 매체의 유형별 특징
③ 멀티미디어 사용의 부작용
④ 광고에 나타난 문화적 고정관념
⑤ 대중 매체에 대한 연령별 선호도
17. 언급된 매체가 아닌 것은?
① newspapers ② television ③ magazines
④ posters ⑤ Internet
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
* coral reef: 산호초
① 산호초 특별 전시회를 홍보하려고
② 환경 보호 지원 정책을 공모하려고
③ 산호초 보호를 위한 기부를 부탁하려고
④ 해양 생태계 보호 법률 제정을 촉구하려고
⑤ 산호초 다양성에 관한 연구 결과를 설명하려고
19. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
On my first day in the Emergency Center, I was about to
drink my coffee when the first call came. I quickly picked up
the line, “9-1-1.” My voice was trembling and my heart was
racing. A woman cried, “My husband’s not breathing!” I
instructed her to begin CPR. I was trying to be as steady as I
could, but I was shaking. The situation was absolutely critical.
While she was performing CPR, I immediately notified the
nearby hospital. After a few tense moments, she came back on
the line and shouted, “Where’s the ambulance?” I replied,
“It’s getting there as quickly as it can.”
① festive ② urgent ③ romantic
④ mysterious ⑤ monotonous
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Merely having goals clearly defined is not sufficient, for
one must also know, moment by moment, what precisely
needs to be done. For instance, a salesperson’s aim is to
conclude a sale profitably. However, each sale requires a
different approach: Should he be pushy or laid back,
authoritative or friendly? And what aspect of the product
should he emphasize? The answers to these questions depend
on variables that cannot be predicted in advance. This holds
true not only for sales but also for most human activities. One
must select a particular strategy appropriate to the occasion
and follow the chosen course of action. Doing so will ensure
more lasting success in reaching one’s goals.
① 비판적 분석에 기반을 두고 목표 설정을 해야 한다.
② 목표 달성을 위해 상황에 맞는 전략을 사용해야 한다.
③ 경제 활성화 전략 수립을 위해 시장 조사를 해야 한다.
④ 성공적인 업무 수행을 위해 작업 환경을 개선해야 한다.
⑤ 고객의 신뢰를 얻기 위해 일관된 전략을 사용해야 한다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Dear Supporter:
I am writing to ask you to financially support the Marine
Biodiversity Preservation Campaign. Global marine
biodiversity is increasingly endangered, and coral reefs
are among the most threatened marine environments on
Earth. This is particularly true for the reefs in the Coral
Triangle Region. With your donation, we can preserve
fragile coral reefs around the world. For more information
on how to donate, please visit www.marinebio.org/reefs.
Thank you.
Sincerely,
Braulio Ferreira
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
There is strong research evidence that children perform
better in mathematics if music is incorporated in it. It has been
shown that mathematics is related with music in various
known ways so much that not putting the relationship to good
use in and out of school could only be to our disadvantage.
Researchers at a Los Angeles school found that 136 second
year elementary school pupils who learned to play the piano
and read music improved their numeracy skills. This could be
so since learning music emphasizes thinking in space and
time, and when pupils learn rhythm, they are learning ratios,
fractions and proportions. Other researchers investigated the
ways in which first and third grade teachers could integrate
music into their regular math classrooms. They concluded that
music-math integrated lessons had positive effects on three
mathematical ability areas of modeling, problem solving and
application.
* fraction: 분수
① 음악과 수학은 조기 교육이 필요하다.
② 음악보다 수학 교육의 중요성이 강조되고 있다.
③ 음악이 수학적 능력을 향상시키는 데 도움이 된다.
④ 수학은 문제 해결 능력에 기본이 되는 학문이다.
⑤ 수학적 원리를 음악 교육 현장에 반영하는 것이 좋다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Do you have the emotional state of mind to become a leader?
People pay close attention to a leader’s subtle expressions of
emotion through body language and facial expression. Some
emotions such as enthusiasm can quickly become contagious.
Others, such as depression or discouragement, can drag down
the entire organization. Leaders with positive emotional states
of mind are like human magnets. People naturally gravitate to
them and want to follow them. Such leaders inspire enthusiasm
in their organizations and attract the best people to work for
them. Conversely, leaders who emit negative emotional states
of mind, who are irritable and bossy, repel people and have few
followers.
* contagious: 전염성의, 전파하는
** repel: 쫓아버리다
① reasons for leaders to hide their emotions
② influence of leaders’ emotional states on people
③ necessity for analyzing leaders’ states of mind
④ various ways of staying away from bad leaders
⑤ ways of strengthening emotional bonds among leaders
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Effective coaches prioritize. They focus on a single task
instead of trying to multitask. They understand that
multitasking is another way of saying you are going to
complete several tasks, none of which are going to be very
good. Yuhong Jiang, professor of psychology at Harvard
University, points out that the brain isn’t built to concentrate
on two things at once. It works more slowly if it tries to.
Effective coaches focus on those things that need to get done
and separate out everything else. Separating what’s important
from what’s not important is prioritizing. Ineffective coaches
fail to put the big tasks first. They either believe they have
unlimited time, thinking that they will have more time
tomorrow to get something done, or they underestimate how
much time they really do have. They have no ability to
estimate how long a task will take.
① How Effective Coaches Approach Tasks
② Why Psychologists Support Multitasking
③ New Horizons of Research on Brain Science
④ Prioritizing Leads to Inefficiency in Performance
⑤ Everything Has Side Effects, But Not Multitasking!
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Fruit and Vegetable Consumption
5 or More Times per Day, Canada, 2008
The above graph shows the percentages of fruit and
vegetable consumption 5 or more times per day by age group
and gender in Canada in 2008. ① Most notably, in each age
group, the percentage of female consumption of fruit and
vegetables 5 or more times per day was higher than that of
males. ② Across all age groups, less than 50 percent of males
consumed fruit and vegetables 5 or more times per day.
③ Among female groups, the 25 to 34 age group showed the
highest percentage; among male groups, the 12 to 17 age group
did so. ④ The percentage gap between males and females in
fruit and vegetable consumption 5 or more times per day was
smallest in the 12 to 17 age group, and largest in the 18 to 24
age group. ⑤ The percentage of female consumption of fruit
and vegetables 5 or more times per day in the 18 to 24 age
group was higher than that of the 35 to 44 age group by 0.1
percentage point.
4
4
8
25. Richard Porson에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
Richard Porson, one of Britain’s most notable classical
scholars, was born on Christmas in 1759. His talents were
recognized early, and he was sent to Eton College by wealthy
sponsors at 15. Four years later, he entered Cambridge
University. He significantly improved Greek texts and edited
four plays written by Euripides. In 1806, he was elected
Principal Librarian at the newly founded London Institution.
During his lifetime, he collected a great many books on
classical literature. Although the number of books he owned
in total is simply unknown, an episode about his passion for
books is well-known: he carried so many books that he was
able to pull book after book out of his pocket when a student
tried to show off his knowledge of Greek writers. Despite his
fame as a classical scholar, he actually published little. On
September 25, 1808, three months before reaching age 49,
Porson died.
① 1759년 크리스마스에 태어났다.
② Euripides가 쓴 희곡 4편을 편집했다.
③ 고전 문학에 관한 수많은 책을 수집했다.
④ 책에 대한 열정과 관련된 일화가 있다.
⑤ 명성에 걸맞게 많은 책을 출판했다.
26. 수영 강사 모집에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 프로그램은 8월 1일부터 5주간 계속된다.
② 지원자의 나이 제한이 없다.
③ 지원자는 어린이를 가르친 경험이 있어야 한다.
④ 이메일로 지원서를 제출할 수 없다.
⑤ 추가 문의는 전화로만 할 수 있다.
27. 11th ANNUAL GRAD CELEBRATION에 관한 다음
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 음악 공연이 포함된다.
② 친구를 두 명까지 데려올 수 있다.
③ 복장 제한이 없다.
④ 입장료는 한 명당 20달러이다.
⑤ 학생회에서 주최한다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
The Internet and communication technologies play an
ever-increasing role in the social lives of young people in
developed societies. Adolescents have been quick to immerse
themselves in technology with most ① using the Internet to
communicate. Young people treat the mobile phone as an
essential necessity of life and often prefer to use text messages
to communicate with their friends. Young people also
② increasingly access social networking websites. As
technology and the Internet are a familiar resource for young
people, it is logical ③ what they would seek assistance from
this source. This has been shown by the increase in websites
that provide therapeutic information for young people. A
number of ‘youth friendly’ mental health websites ④have
been developed. The information ⑤ presented often takes the
form of Frequently Asked Questions, fact sheets and suggested
links. It would seem, therefore, logical to provide online
counselling for young people.
Looking for Swimming Instructors
The Little Swimmers Program is now looking for
swimming instructors.
－ It is a summer vacation swimming program for
children aged 8-10.
－ It is a 4-week program beginning on August 1.
Requirements
－ Over 20 years of age
－ Previous experience in teaching children
－ Lifeguard and first aid certifications
Applicants should download the application form from
the website at www.littleswimmersclub.com. After
completing the form, submit it by e-mail at lsp@me.com
no later than July 15. For additional inquiries, please
contact us at 123-456-7890 or visit our website.
11th ANNUAL GRAD CELEBRATION
Graduating students, it’s party time! Come and join
us. We’ll make the last unforgettable memories of our
high school life. The celebration includes dinner, a
photo slide show, music performances and dancing.
You can bring up to two friends.
∙Time & Date: 7:00 p.m. on May 22
∙Location: Westhampton High School Gym
∙Dress Code: Formal wear
∙Entrance Fee: $20 per person
This event is hosted by the Student Council. For more
info, see the website: www.westhamptonhs.wsh.org.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
An Egyptian executive, after entertaining his Canadian
guest, offered him joint partnership in a new business venture.
The Canadian, delighted with the offer, suggested that they
meet again the next morning with their ① respective lawyers to
finalize the details. The Egyptian never showed up. The
surprised and disappointed Canadian tried to understand what
had gone wrong: Did Egyptians ② lack punctuality? Was the
Egyptian expecting a counter-offer? Were lawyers unavailable
in Cairo? None of these explanations proved to be correct;
rather, the problem was ③ caused by the different meaning
Canadians and Egyptians attach to inviting lawyers. The
Canadian regarded the lawyers’ ④ absence as facilitating the
successful completion of the negotiation; the Egyptian
interpreted it as signaling the Canadian’s mistrust of his
verbal commitment. Canadians often use the impersonal
formality of a lawyer’s services to finalize ⑤ agreements.
Egyptians, by contrast, more frequently depend on the personal
relationship between bargaining partners to accomplish the
same purpose.
* punctuality: 시간 엄수
30. 밑줄 친 him[his]이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Dad just laughed and walked out of the room still holding
Slade in his arms. He had dressed him and now he put ① him
in his chair. As Slade sat in his chair eating a biscuit that Dad
had spread with butter and homemade strawberry jam, Mom
walked into the kitchen. She took one look at her little boy and
started laughing; ② his little face and hands were covered with
biscuit and jam. She thought how really cute he was. “Honey,
what have you done? Look at him. I will never get ③ him
clean again. I guess when he gets through eating you can take
④ him out and dump him in the bathtub.” Dad laughed. Slade
giggled and tried to spit biscuit all over Dad. It didn’t hit
⑤ him because luckily he avoided the spray. That made Mom
laugh even more and soon the little cabin was full of love and
laughter.
[31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Early human societies were nomadic, based on hunting and
gathering, and, in a shifting pattern of life in search of new
sources of food, qualities such as lightness, portability, and
adaptability were dominant criteria. With the evolution of more
settled rural societies based on agriculture, other characteristics,
other traditions of form appropriate to the new patterns of life,
rapidly emerged. It must be emphasized, however, that tradition
was not static, but constantly subject to minute variations
appropriate to people and their circumstances. Although
traditional forms reflected the experience of social groups,
specific manifestations could be adapted in various minute and
subtle ways to suit individual users’ needs. A chair could keep
its basic, accepted characteristics while still being closely
shaped in detail to the physique and proportions of a specific
person. This basic principle of allowed a
constant stream of incremental modifications to be introduced,
which, if demonstrated by experience to be advantageous, could
be integrated back into the mainstream of tradition. [3점]
* manifestation: 외적 형태, 표시
** physique: 체격
*** incremental: (점진적으로) 증가하는
① dedication ② customization
③ cooperation ④ generalization
⑤ preservation
32. Investigators as a personality type place a high value on
science, process, and learning. They excel at research, using
logic and the information gained through their senses to
conquer complex problems. Nothing thrills them more than a
“big find.” Intellectual, introspective, and exceedingly
detail-oriented, investigators are happiest when they’re using
their brain power to pursue what they deem as a worthy
outcome. They , and they
dislike overly structured environments that necessitate a set
response to challenges. Investigators are not interested in
leadership, and developing the interpersonal skills necessary
to fuel collaboration is a hurdle for many of them. They may
feel insecure in their ability to “keep up” in their fields and
can react badly when forced to put more important work on
hold to complete a task that doesn’t intrigue them. [3점]
* introspective: 자기 성찰적인
** deem: 여기다, 생각하다
① attempt to go with the flow
② prefer to march to their own beat
③ dare to take the lead from the front
④ tend to work shoulder to shoulder
⑤ pay more attention to assigned tasks
6
6
8
33. It is easy to find examples of correlations which are far
more systematic than could occur by chance and yet which it
would be absurd to treat as evidence of a direct causal link. For
instance, there is a high degree of correlation between shoe
size and vocabulary size: people with larger shoe sizes tend to
have much larger vocabularies than people with smaller shoe
sizes. But having larger feet does not cause anyone to gain a
larger vocabulary; nor does having a large vocabulary cause
your feet to grow. The obvious explanation of the correlation
is that children tend to have much smaller feet than adults, and,
because children acquire their vocabularies gradually as they
grow older, it is hardly surprising that, on average, people with
smaller feet have smaller vocabularies. In other words, foot
size and vocabulary size can be explained in terms of
from infancy
to adulthood: a cause which both observed phenomena have in
common. [3점]
① by-products of language acquisition
② causal links between uncommon events
③ contrasts between physical and mental growth
④ cultural beliefs derived from social interactions
⑤ features of the process of human development
34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Feedback is usually most effective when you offer it at the
earliest opportunity, particularly if your objective is to teach
someone a skill. (A) , if you are teaching your
friend how to make your famous egg rolls, you provide a
step-by-step commentary as you watch your pupil. If he makes
a mistake, you don’t wait until the egg rolls are finished to tell
him that he left out the cabbage. He needs immediate feedback
to finish the rest of the sequence successfully. Sometimes,
(B) , if a person is already sensitive and upset about
something, delaying feedback can be wise. Use your critical
thinking skills to analyze when feedback will do the most
good. Rather than automatically offering immediate correction,
use the just-in-time approach and provide feedback just before
the person might make another mistake.
(A) (B)
① For example …… however
② For example …… as a result
③ In addition …… in fact
④ Similarly …… moreover
⑤ Similarly …… therefore
[35～36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
35.
If you walk into a store looking for a new computer and
the first salesperson you meet immediately points to a
group of computers and says, “Any of those are good,”
and then walks away, there is a good chance you will walk
away, too, and with good reason.
(A) That is, the reader is the writer’s “customer” and one
whose business or approval is one we need to seek. The
more you know about your reader, the greater the chances
you will meet his or her needs and expectations.
(B) Why? You were never asked what you were seeking, how
much you could spend, or if the computer would be used
for business or pleasure or your child’s homework
assignments.
(C) In brief, the salesperson never considered or asked about
your needs and preferences. Just as it would come as no
surprise to learn the salesperson who was indifferent to a
potential customer’s needs was soon out of a job, the
same holds true for writers who ignore their readers.
① (A)－(C)－(B) ② (B)－(A)－(C)
③ (B)－(C)－(A) ④ (C)－(A)－(B)
⑤ (C)－(B)－(A)
36.
According to one traditional definition, aesthetics is the
branch of philosophy that deals with beauty, especially
beauty in the arts. Examining the pleasing features of the
Mona Lisa or a snow-capped mountain, for example,
would come under aesthetics.
(A) Consider Picasso’s Guernica, a huge (11-ft. × 25.6-ft.)
painting in black, white, and grey that he made in
response to the slaughter of Spanish civilians by German
and Italian warplanes during the Spanish Civil War.
Images of a cruel war dominate the canvas.
(B) That definition seems too narrow, however, since works of
art and natural objects may interest us in other ways than by
being beautiful. Instead of evoking admiration of beauty,
artists may evoke puzzlement, shock, and even disgust.
(C) This work is widely admired but not for being beautiful.
So a better definition of aesthetics would be that it is the
branch of philosophy that deals with the ways things
please people in being experienced.
* slaughter: 대량 학살
① (A)－(C)－(B) ② (B)－(A)－(C)
③ (B)－(C)－(A) ④ (C)－(A)－(B)
⑤ (C)－(B)－(A)
7
7
8
[37～38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37.
Analysis of the errors leads the teacher to modify the
teaching of these procedures, using the language ‘seven
and three more’ rather than ‘seven, count on three’.
A 5-year-old doing addition problems by counting on makes
the same error repeatedly, with responses such as: 7 + 3 = 9,
6 + 5 = 10 and 8 + 4 = 11. ( ① ) The teacher asks the pupil to
show how these answers were obtained and notices that in
doing the addition of 3 to 7, the pupil counts ‘seven, eight,
nine’, while turning up three fingers in turn. ( ② ) The pupil
is ‘counting on 3 from 7’ but incorrectly starting at 7. ( ③ )
The teacher recalls similar errors that some pupils made when
doing addition problems by counting on along a number
line. ( ④ ) This is immediately effective. ( ⑤ ) So the
teacher reinforces this particular language pattern in
subsequent oral work with the whole class.
38.
Still, many believe we will eventually reach a point at
which conflict with the finite nature of resources is
inevitable.
Can we sustain our standard of living in the same ecological
space while consuming the resources of that space? This
question is particularly relevant since we are living in an era
of skyrocketing fuel costs and humans’ ever-growing carbon
footprints. ( ① ) Some argue that we are already at a
breaking point because we have nearly exhausted the Earth’s
finite carrying capacity. ( ② ) However, it’s possible that
innovations and cultural changes can expand Earth’s capacity.
( ③ ) We are already seeing this as the world economies are
increasingly looking at “green,” renewable industries like
solar and hydrogen energy. ( ④ ) That means survival could
ultimately depend on getting the human population below its
carrying capacity. ( ⑤ ) Otherwise, without population
control, the demand for resources will eventually exceed an
ecosystem’s ability to provide it. [3점]
39. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Scientific experiments should be designed to show that your
hypothesis is wrong and should be conducted completely
objectively with no possible subjective influence on the
outcome. ① Unfortunately few, if any, scientists are truly
objective as they have often decided long before the
experiment is begun what they would like the result to be.
② This means that very often bias is (unintentionally)
introduced into the experiment, the experimental procedure or
the interpretation of results. ③ It is all too easy to justify to
yourself why an experiment which does not fit with your
expectations should be ignored, and why one which provides
the results you ‘hoped for’ is the right one. ④ It is important
to draw a meaningful result from the experiment on peer
group activities. ⑤ This can be partly avoided by conducting
experiments ‘blinded’ and by asking others to check your data
or repeat experiments.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Certain species are more crucial to the maintenance of
their ecosystem than others. Such species, called keystone
species, are vital in determining the nature and structure of
the entire ecosystem. The fact that other species depend on
or are greatly affected by the keystone species is revealed
when the keystone species is removed. It is in this sense
that we should draw attention to fig trees. Different species
of fig trees may be keystone species in tropical rain
forests. Although figs collectively produce a continuous
crop of fruits, fruit-eating monkeys, birds, bats, and other
vertebrates of the forest do not normally consume large
quantities of figs in their diets. During the time of year
when other fruits are less plentiful, however, fig trees
become important in sustaining fruit-eating vertebrates.
Should the fig trees disappear, most of the fruit-eating
vertebrates would be eliminated. Protecting fig trees in
such tropical rainforest ecosystems is an important
conservation goal because it increases the likelihood that
monkeys, birds, bats, and other vertebrates will survive.
* fig: 무화과
** vertebrate: 척추동물

As a keystone species in tropical rain forests, fig trees
support fruit-eating animals’ survival when other fruits are
(A) , and thus (B) their ecosystem.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① insufficient …… preserve ② insufficient …… create
③ poisonous …… purify ④ poisonous …… reshape
⑤ abundant …… clean
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
True understanding inevitably requires a knowledge of
context. The proper way of understanding a beast in a zoo is
a telling example. At the zoo, visitors may witness a great
beast pacing behind the bars of its cage. They may observe
and admire the creature, its amazing bone structure, and its
magnificent coat. However, no matter how long visitors
spend in front of that cage, they will never truly understand
the beast. True understanding can only come from seeing the
creature in its natural surroundings and, in turn, the ways in
which its presence affects its environment.
What is true of the mysterious beast in the zoo is also true
of science. To fully understand science, it must be
considered within the society in which it functions. Science
is not conducted in a . It is embedded within a
social fabric, and just as a flesh-and-blood beast influences
and is influenced by its environment, so too do science and
society mutually influence one another. Society, through
ethical and economic constraints, exerts a powerful influence
on what science accomplishes. At the same time, the results
of science have profound, and sometimes unexpected,
impacts on every human being on earth. Therefore, to make
sense of science-related issues, it is critical to recognize the
bidirectional relationship between science and society.
* exert: 행사하다, 발휘하다
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Animal Society: A Mirror of Ourselves
② A New Perspective for Studying Zoology
③ What Has Science Done for You Recently?
④ Why Does Science Need Critical Thinking?
⑤ Understanding Science: Society Does Matter
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① vacuum ② pattern ③ moment
④ community ⑤ conflict
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Peter Anderson was exhausted when he finally opened the
front door of his apartment. He teaches first graders, which
means he lives in a world of riddles, birthday cakes, and
pointless stories. (a) His world is dominated by 6-year-olds.
Throwing himself with his leather bag on the long,
comfortable sofa, he closed his eyes and reviewed the events
of the day.
(B)
It was held in a seminar room where Anderson met the
principal for the first time three years ago. The principal
asked why he chose to work with young children. (b) He
answered that he loved helping children learn to write their
names for the first time, finding someone a new friend, and
sharing in the joy of reading. But, as time passed, his
commitment and passion seemed to fade gradually. He
recalled his strong conviction during the interview.
(C)
That’s why Anderson took the job in the first place even
though some of his friends attempted to persuade him to be a
lawyer or businessman. (c) He shook his head and opened his
eyes. As he struggled to get up, he saw something fall from his
bag. It was a birthday card from his students, decorated with
all kinds of odd-shaped but colorful hearts and scribbled
names. “Dear Mr. Anderson, happy birthday to you. It’s our
surprise gift for you. We love you!” Anderson could not help
but smile. He already felt much better.
(D)
Today was especially busy and wearying, and Anderson
wondered whether he was really suitable for teaching. He was
stressed as kids constantly sought (d) his attention. At snack
time, Emily wanted him to open her milk carton, so he did. As
she was drinking, Scott spilled his milk and Anderson had to
help (e) him clean it up. Then Jenny, Andrew, Mark, and . . . .
Kids never ceased. However, he still loved them. That’s also
what he had said in the interview for the position.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)－(D)－(C) ② (C)－(B)－(D)
③ (C)－(D)－(B) ④ (D)－(B)－(C)
⑤ (D)－(C)－(B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Anderson에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 1학년 학생들을 가르친다.
② 인터뷰 때 가졌던 강한 확신을 떠올렸다.
③ 친구들로부터 법률가나 사업가가 되라는 권유를 받았다.
④ 가방에서 떨어진 생일 카드는 부모님으로부터 온 것이었다.
⑤ 간식 시간에 Emily의 우유팩을 열어 주었다.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, thanks. I’ll have one later.
② Sure. Take as many as you want.
③ Well, he’s quite a diligent farmer.
④ Sorry, but apples aren’t my favorite.
⑤ Good idea. Let’s buy them at the market.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Don’t worry. The forecast says it’ll clear up soon.
② You’re too late. Your flight already departed.
③ Then, I’d like to get a refund for this ticket.
④ That’s right. We can reschedule your meeting.
⑤ No problem. We’ll change your seat to the aisle side.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 컴퓨터 사용 시 올바른 자세에 대해 조언하려고
② 컴퓨터 사용 중 휴식의 필요성을 강조하려고
③ 컴퓨터 사용 관련 절전 요령을 설명하려고
④ 회사 내 컴퓨터 보안 강화 방침을 안내하려고
⑤ 직장 내 컴퓨터 개인 용무 사용 자제를 당부하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 교사는 수업 시 학생들의 개인차를 고려할 필요가 있다.
② 원만한 교우 관계는 학습 동기를 강화시킨다.
③ 게임을 이용한 수업은 학습에 도움이 된다.
④ 효과적인 수업을 위한 게임 개발이 중요하다.
⑤ 조용한 학습 분위기가 수업 진행에 필수적이다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 치과 접수원 － 환자 ② 보건 교사 － 학생
③ 심리 상담사 － 내담자 ④ 약사 － 제약 회사 직원
⑤ 보험 설계사 － 고객
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학급 친구들 인터뷰하기
② 조별 발표 순서 정하기
③ 인터넷 자료 검색하기
④ 발표 주제 선정하기
⑤ 과학 과제 제출하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 팀 회식에 참석할 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 아버지와 저녁 식사를 해야 해서
② 어머니 병문안을 가야 해서
③ 해외 출장을 가야 해서
④ 팀 프로젝트 준비를 해야 해서
⑤ 아버지 생신 선물을 사러 가야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $27 ② $30 ③ $35 ④ $36 ⑤ $40
10. 대화를 듣고, Young Inventors Challenge에 관해 두 사람이
언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 참가 연령 ② 지원 마감일 ③ 대회 장소
④ 참가비 ⑤ 우승 상품
11. Sunnyvale Community Closet에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 비영리 단체가 운영한다.
② 기증받기 전에 기기가 작동하는지 점검한다.
③ 기기 보관을 위한 공간이 제한적이다.
④ 주말에는 오후 5시까지 연다.
⑤ 기증자에게 회원 카드를 발급한다.
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 보러 가기로 선택한
아파트를 고르시오.
Apartments in Westford Village
Apartment Number of
Bedrooms
Walking Distance
from Downtown Floor Monthly
Rental Cost
① A one 5 minutes 8th $600
② B two 5 minutes 3rd $700
③ C two 15 minutes 6th $650
④ D three 15 minutes 4th $750
⑤ E three 25 minutes 2nd $700
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① That’s too bad. The submission date has passed.
② Sure. They’ll make a back-up file just in case.
③ Trust yourself. Your efforts will pay off.
④ It’s not your fault. Wait for another chance.
⑤ No problem. The directors’ meeting was canceled.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Right. I’d like to send this package by express mail.
② Yes. I want to buy some stamps to put on this letter.
③ Great! Please give me the whole flower series now.
④ That’s good. But those aren’t the stamps you want.
⑤ Thanks! I’ll go there now before they’re sold out.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, David가 Jane에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
David:
① I’m going to hire you as my speechwriter.
② You’re the right person to give me advice.
③ I wouldn’t make a single change if I were you.
④ You should’ve written the speech on your own.
⑤ I think it’s better to soften the speech a little bit.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① avoiding insect bites in the wild
② distinguishing species of insects
③ insects’ self-protection methods
④ means of saving endangered insects
⑤ a variety of insects’ hunting techniques
17. 언급된 곤충이 아닌 것은?
① ants ② butterflies ③ beetles
④ grasshoppers ⑤ bees
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 캠프 참가를 위해 여행 일정을 조정하려고
② 캠프 참가 시기를 변경할 수 있는지 문의하려고
③ 캠프 등록 시 지불한 예치금 환불을 요구하려고
④ 캠프 일정이 분명하지 않은 것에 대해 항의하려고
⑤ 예약한 캠프 프로그램의 변경된 내용을 확인하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I’m leaving early tomorrow morning, finally! I’ve always
wanted to explore the Amazon, the unknown and mysterious
world. At this hour, the great Emerald Amazon Explorer should
be at the port waiting for me to get on board. Freshwater dolphins
will escort me on the playful river, and 500 species of birds, half
a dozen species of monkeys, and numerous colorful butterflies
will welcome me into their kingdom. I wish I could camp in the
wild and enjoy the company of mosquitos, snakes, and spiders.
I’d love to make the world’s largest rainforest home. My heart
swells as much as my chubby bags; yet, I’d better get some sleep
since a long, tough journey is ahead of me.
① excited ② exhausted ③ frustrated
④ indifferent ⑤ relieved
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Assertiveness may seem to some people to be uncharacteristic
of counselors. If your picture of a counselor is someone who
never disagrees, always “goes along,” wants everything to be
nice all the time, and only does what other people want him or
her to do, this is not a picture of an assertive counselor. Being
assertive does not have to mean being disagreeable. Being a
counselor does not mean that you should simply be silent
when someone tells a racist joke. An assertive counselor
would find a way to call that person’s attention to the fact
that the joke is racist, explaining how it offended the hearer,
and suggesting ways similar jokes could be avoided. Being
assertive is a highly developed skill ― it should fit nicely in
the counselor’s repertoire of techniques.
① 상담사는 상대방의 감정을 해치는 농담을 하지 말아야 한다.
② 상담사는 자기 생각을 분명하게 드러낼 줄도 알아야 한다.
③ 상담사는 항상 친절한 태도로 상담을 진행해야 한다.
④ 상담사는 정기적으로 상담 기술 교육을 받아야 한다.
⑤ 상담사는 상담 기록을 철저히 관리해야 한다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Dear Coach Johnson,
My name is Christina Markle, Bradley Markle’s mother.
Bradley and I were thrilled to learn that you’re holding
your Gymnastics Summer Camp again this year. So I
didn’t hesitate to sign up and pay the non-refundable
deposit for the second week program, which is from July
13 to 17. But today I remembered that our family is
going to get back from a trip on July 13, and I’m afraid
Bradley won’t be able to make it on the very first day of
the program. Rather than make him skip the day, I’d like
to check to see if he could switch to the third week
program. Please let us know if that’s possible. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Christina Markle
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
The negative effects of extrinsic motivators such as grades
have been documented with students from different cultures.
Although this matter is more complex than simply regarding
all extrinsic rewards as controlling or diminishing learning,
we agree with Richard Ryan and his colleagues that people
across different cultures are likely to express more satisfaction
with their lives when their primary goals are intrinsic rather
than extrinsic. Another consistent research finding is that
when a learning activity is undertaken explicitly to attain
some extrinsic reward, people respond by seeking the least
demanding way of ensuring the reward. Since there are three
decades of evidence that dominating instruction with a system
of controlling external rewards may contribute to inferior
learning, using a pedagogy based on theories of intrinsic
motivation appears to be a more reasonable and effective
approach to enhancing learning among culturally diverse
students.
* pedagogy: 교수법
① 적절한 외적 보상이 삶의 만족도를 향상시킨다.
② 학습자의 외적 동기와 내적 동기의 균형이 필요하다.
③ 문화적 다양성을 고려한 교육 이론의 확립이 중요하다.
④ 내적 동기의 교육적 기능에 대한 실질적인 연구가 시급하다.
⑤ 내적 동기 부여가 문화적 배경이 다른 학생들의 교육에 효과적이다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Twin sirens hide in the sea of history, tempting those
seeking to understand and appreciate the past onto the reefs of
misunderstanding and misinterpretation. These twin dangers
are temporocentrism and ethnocentrism. Temporocentrism is
the belief that your times are the best of all possible times. All
other times are thus inferior. Ethnocentrism is the belief that
your culture is the best of all possible cultures. All other
cultures are thus inferior. Temporocentrism and ethnocentrism
unite to cause individuals and cultures to judge all other
individuals and cultures by the “superior” standards of their
current culture. This leads to a total lack of perspective when
dealing with past and / or foreign cultures and a resultant
misunderstanding and misappreciation of them. Temporocentrism
and ethnocentrism tempt moderns into unjustified criticisms
of the peoples of the past.
① distinct differences in the ways of recording history
② universal features discovered in different cultures
③ historians’ efforts to advocate their own culture
④ pros and cons of two cross-cultural perspectives
⑤ beliefs that cause biased interpretations of the past
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we remark with surprise that someone “looks young”
for his or her chronological age, we are observing that we
all age biologically at different rates. Scientists have good
evidence that this apparent difference is real. It is likely that age
changes begin in different parts of the body at different times
and that the rate of annual change varies among various cells,
tissues, and organs, as well as from person to person. Unlike
the passage of time, biological aging resists easy measurement.
What we would like to have is one or a few measurable
biological changes that mirror all other biological age changes
without reference to the passage of time, so that we could say,
for example, that someone who is chronologically eighty years
old is biologically sixty years old. This kind of measurement
would help explain why one eighty-year-old has so many more
youthful qualities than does another eighty-year-old, who may
be biologically eighty or even ninety years old.
① In Search of a Mirror Reflecting Biological Aging
② Reasons for Slow Aging in the Modern Era
③ A Few Tips to Guess Chronological Age
④ Secrets of Biological Aging Disclosed
⑤ Looking for the Fountain of Youth
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the results of a survey conducted in
2012. It compares the percentage of parents of minor children
(hereafter, parents) and that of other adults in terms of their
involvement in six library activities. ①Most notably, the
percentage of parents is higher than that of other adults in all
activity types. ② The percentage of parents who browsed
shelves is the same as that of parents who borrowed print
books. ③ The percentage gap between parents and other
adults is largest in the activity of attending classes or events
for children and is smallest in the activity of using computers
or the Internet. ④ The percentage of other adults who browsed
shelves is twice as high as that of other adults who borrowed
DVDs, CDs, or videotapes. ⑤ Finally, the percentage of
parents who borrowed e-books is less than 10% but is higher
than that of other adults who did the same activity.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4
8
25. Protogenes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Known for his devotion to each of his paintings, Protogenes
was an ancient Greek painter and a rival of Apelles. He was
born in Caunus, on the coast of Caria, but lived most of his
life in Rhodes. Little else is known of him. But there are
some accounts of his paintings. The Ialysus and the Satyr
were the most well-known among his works. Protogenes spent
approximately seven years painting the Ialysus, a depiction of a
local hero of a town in Rhodes. After remaining in Rhodes for
at least 200 years, it was carried off to Rome. There later it
was destroyed by fire. Protogenes worked on the Satyr during
Demetrius Poliorcetes’ attack on Rhodes from 305 to 304 B.C.
Interestingly, the garden in which he painted the Satyr was in
the middle of the enemy’s camp. Protogenes is said to have been
about seventy years of age when the Satyr was completed.
① 고대 그리스 화가였다.
② 일생의 대부분을 Rhodes에서 지냈다.
③ Ialysus를 그리는 데 대략 7년을 보냈다.
④ 적진과 멀리 떨어진 곳에서 Satyr를 그렸다.
⑤ Satyr를 완성했을 때는 약 70세였다고 전해진다.
26. 2015 Annual Teen Programmers Conference에 관한 다음
안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 3일간 진행된다.
② 시청의 대강당에서 개최된다.
③ 12개의 개별 세미나가 열린다.
④ Total Pass에 점심 뷔페가 포함된다.
⑤ 예약하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.
27. Virginia Art Show 2015에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 스무 번째 개최되는 행사이다.
② 유명한 예술가의 작품이 전시된다.
③ 행사 첫날 Virginia Philharmonic의 공연이 있다.
④ 두 달 동안 열린다.
⑤ Virginia 주민의 무료입장이 가능하다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
The Greeks’ focus on the salient object and its attributes led
to ① their failure to understand the fundamental nature of
causality. Aristotle explained that a stone falling through the
air is due to the stone having the property of “gravity.” But of
course a piece of wood ② tossed into water floats instead of
sinking. This phenomenon Aristotle explained as being due
to the wood having the property of “levity”! In both cases
the focus is ③ exclusively on the object, with no attention
paid to the possibility that some force outside the object
might be relevant. But the Chinese saw the world as consisting
of continuously interacting substances, so their attempts to
understand it ④ causing them to be oriented toward the
complexities of the entire “field,” that is, the context or
environment as a whole. The notion ⑤ that events always
occur in a field of forces would have been completely
intuitive to the Chinese.
* salient: 현저한, 두드러진
** levity: 가벼움
2015 Annual Teen Programmers Conference
November 21 & 22, 10:00 a.m.－ 5:00 p.m.
Hosted by the Teen Programmers Association
Is the computer screen your universe? Then join our
conference held at West State University’s Brilliance
Hall, and challenge yourself! Here you’ll meet the leaders
in modern computer science.
The conference includes:
∙Lectures by renowned industry figures, including
Warwick Meade
∙10 separate seminars on hardware / software, programming,
and new applications
∙Exhibitions of their latest products by 12 major firms
Ticket Prices:
∙Total Pass: $25 (includes buffet lunch)
∙Lectures & Seminars Only: $15
∙Exhibitions Only: $10
Booking is essential. Reserve your tickets at
www.tiinprogrammers.org.
Virginia Art Show 2015
We invite you to join us at the 20th Virginia Art Show,
famed all along the east coast for the variety and quality
of its exhibits. Works by famous artists such as Mabel
Green, Theresa Peterson, and Ronald McKuen will be
displayed. The Virginia Philharmonic will perform on
the first day of the show.
Come and enjoy the fabulous drawings, sculptures,
photographs, digital works, and the great music!
∙Dates: November 1－30
∙Hours: 10:00 a.m.－9:00 p.m.
∙Place: Westchester Art Center
∙Entrance Fees:
- Adults: $15 one day
- Children: $7 one day
Free admission for Virginia residents
For further information, please visit our website at
www.virginiaartshow.org.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
The Atitlán Giant Grebe was a large, flightless bird that had
evolved from the much more widespread and smaller
Pied-billed Grebe. By 1965 there were only around 80 birds
left on Lake Atitlán. One immediate reason was easy enough
to spot: the local human population was cutting down the reed
beds at a furious rate. This (A) accommodation / destruction
was driven by the needs of a fast growing mat-making
industry. But there were other problems. An American airline
was intent on developing the lake as a tourist destination for
fishermen. However, there was a major problem with this
idea: the lake (B) lacked / supported any suitable sporting
fish! To compensate for this rather obvious defect, a specially
selected species of fish called the Large-mouthed Bass was
introduced. The introduced individuals immediately turned
their attentions to the crabs and small fish that lived in the lake,
thus (C) competing / cooperating with the few remaining
grebes for food. There is also little doubt that they sometimes
gobbled up the zebra-striped Atitlán Giant Grebe’s chicks.
* reed: 갈대
** gobble up: 게걸스럽게 먹다
(A) (B) (C)
① accommodation …… lacked …… competing
② accommodation …… supported …… cooperating
③ destruction …… lacked …… competing
④ destruction …… supported …… cooperating
⑤ destruction …… lacked …… cooperating
30. 밑줄 친 he[his]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
The dancers stood on a two-step elevated stage, so that there
was a natural gap between those who came to dance and those
who came to watch. The host randomly pulled the name of a
well-known dancer, Linx, out of a hat. People cheered.
According to the format, Linx had to “call out” another dancer
to battle him on stage. Instead of deliberately choosing
someone, however, ① he decided to select his opponent
randomly by making himself into a human spin-wheel. He
propelled himself into a backspin, covered ② his eyes, and
extended his arm above his head. When his body finally
stopped spinning, ③ his arm pointed away from the dancers
on stage and directly at Dan Tres, standing among the
spectators. The crowd erupted in “Ohhhhs!” because ④ he
was an older family man who had not danced hip-hop in many
years, while the much younger Linx was a nimble b-boy. Linx
looked embarrassed, but nonetheless ⑤ he called out the
respected elder to battle.
* nimble: 동작이 날렵한
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. When two cultures come into contact, they do not
exchange every cultural item. If that were the case, there
would be no cultural differences in the world today. Instead,
only a small number of cultural elements ever spread from
one culture to another. Which cultural item is accepted
depends largely on the item’s use and compatibility with
already existing cultural traits. For example, it is not likely
that men’s hair dyes designed to “get out the gray” will spread
into parts of rural Africa where a person’s status is elevated
with advancing years. Even when a(n) is
consistent with a society’s needs, there is still no guarantee
that it will be accepted. For example, most people in the
United States using US customary units (e.g., inch, foot, yard,
mile, etc.) have resisted adopting the metric system even
though making such a change would enable US citizens to
interface with the rest of the world more efficiently. [3점]
* metric system: 미터법
① categorization ② innovation
③ investigation ④ observation
⑤ specification
32. Some distinctions between good and bad are hardwired into
our biology. Infants enter the world ready to respond to pain as
bad and to sweet (up to a point) as good. In many situations,
however, the boundary between good and bad is a reference
point that changes over time and depends on the immediate
circumstances. Imagine that you are out in the country on a cold
night, inadequately dressed for the pouring rain, your clothes
soaked. A stinging cold wind completes your misery. As you
wander around, you find a large rock that provides some shelter
from the fury of the elements. The biologist Michel Cabanac
would call the experience of that moment intensely pleasurable
because it functions, as pleasure normally does, to indicate the
direction of .
The pleasant relief will not last very long, of course, and you
will soon be shivering behind the rock again, driven by your
renewed suffering to seek better shelter. [3점]
* shiver: 떨다
① a permanent emotional adjustment to circumstantial demands
② enhancing self-consciousness through physical suffering
③ a biologically significant improvement of circumstances
④ judging desirable and undesirable conditions impartially
⑤ a mentally pre-determined inclination for emotional stability
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6
8
33. Research and development for seed improvement has long
been a public domain and government activity for the
common good. However, private capital started to flow into
seed production and took it over as a sector of the economy,
creating an artificial split between the two aspects of the
seed’s nature: its role as means of production and its role as
product. This process gained pace after the invention of
hybrid breeding of maize in the late 1920s. Today most maize
seed cultivated are hybrids. The companies that sell them are
able to keep the distinct parent lines from farmers, and the
grain that they produce is not suited for seed saving and
replanting. The combination guarantees that farmers will
have to . In the
1990s the extension of patent laws as the only intellectual
property rights tool into the area of seed varieties started to
create a growing market for private seed companies. [3점]
* maize: 옥수수
① buy more seed from the company each season
② use more chemical fertilizer than before
③ pioneer markets for their food products
④ increase the efficiency of food production
⑤ search for ways to maintain rural communities
34. Long before Walt Whitman wrote Leaves of Grass, poets had
addressed themselves to fame. Horace, Petrarch, Shakespeare,
Milton, and Keats all hoped that poetic greatness would grant
them a kind of earthly immortality. Whitman held a similar
faith that for centuries the world would value his poems. But
to this ancient desire to live forever on the page, he added a
new sense of fame. Readers would not simply attend to the
poet’s work; they would be attracted to the greatness of his
personality. They would see in his poems a vibrant cultural
performance, an individual springing from the book with
tremendous charisma and appeal. Out of the political rallies
and electoral parades that marked Jacksonian America, Whitman
defined poetic fame in relation to the crowd. Other poets
might look for their inspiration from the goddess of poetry.
Whitman’s poet sought .
In the instability of American democracy, fame would be
dependent on celebrity, on the degree to which the people
rejoiced in the poet and his work. [3점]
* rally: 집회
① a refuge from public attention
② poetic purity out of political chaos
③ immortality in literature itself
④ the approval of his contemporaries
⑤ fame with political celebrities
[35～36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
35.
Some people make few intentional changes in life. Sure,
over time they may get fatter, gather lines, and go gray.
(A) They train for marathons, quit smoking, switch fields,
write plays, take up the guitar, or learn to tango even if
they never danced before in their lives. What is the
difference between these two groups of people?
(B) But they wear their hair the same way, buy the same
brand of shoes, eat the same breakfast, and stick to
routines for no reason other than the ease of a
comfortable, predictable life. Yet as both research and
real life show, many others do make important changes.
(C) It’s their perspective. People who change do not question
whether change is possible or look for reasons they
cannot change. They simply decide on a change they
want and do what is necessary to accomplish it.
Changing, which always stems from a firm decision,
becomes job number one.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
36.
Sometimes, after punishment has been administered a
few times, it needn’t be continued, because the mere threat
of punishment is enough to induce the desired behavior.
(A) Avoidance training, however, doesn’t always work in our
favor. For instance, a child who has been repeatedly
criticized for poor performance on math may learn to
dodge difficult math problems in order to avoid further
punishment.
(B) Unfortunately, because of this avoidance, the child fails
to develop his math skills and therefore improve the
capabilities he has, and so a vicious cycle has set in.
The avoidance must be unlearned through some positive
experiences with math in order for this cycle to be broken.
(C) Psychologists call this avoidance training because the
person is learning to avoid the possibility of a punishing
consequence. Avoidance training is responsible for many
everyday behaviors. It has taught you to carry an
umbrella when it looks like rain to avoid the punishment
of getting wet, and to keep your hand away from a hot
iron to avoid the punishment of a burn.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7
8
[37～38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37.
Surprised by the vision of an unfamiliar silhouette pushing
into the house, these dogs were using their eyes instead of
their noses.
Remember when you were little and you imagined that
adults had infinite power? Surely someone who could drive
the car, open the juice container, and reach the sink could
make it stop raining. ( ① ) I think that’s the same expectation
that we have with respect to our dogs and their ability to
smell. ( ② ) Because they are so good at using their noses,
we assume that they can smell anything, anytime. ( ③ ) But
dogs use other senses, too, and the brains of both humans
and dogs tend to intensify one sense at a time. ( ④ ) Many
owners have been snapped at by their dogs when they
returned home with a new hairdo or a new coat. ( ⑤ ) Their
noses may be remarkable, but they’re not always switched on.
38.
Even so, it is not the money per se that is valuable, but the
fact that it can potentially yield more positive experiences.
Money ― beyond the bare minimum necessary for food and
shelter ― is nothing more than a means to an end. Yet so
often we confuse means with ends, and sacrifice happiness
(end) for money (means). It is easy to do this when material
wealth is elevated to the position of the ultimate end, as it so
often is in our society. ( ① ) This is not to say that the
accumulation and production of material wealth is in itself
wrong. ( ② ) Material prosperity can help individuals, as well
as society, attain higher levels of happiness. ( ③ ) Financial
security can liberate us from work we do not find meaningful
and from having to worry about the next paycheck. ( ④ )
Moreover, the desire to make money can challenge and inspire
us. ( ⑤ ) Material wealth in and of itself does not necessarily
generate meaning or lead to emotional wealth. [3점]
* per se: 그 자체로
39. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Food intake is essential for the survival of every living
organism. The failure to detect spoiled or toxic food can
have deadly consequences. Therefore, it is not surprising that
humans use all their five senses to analyze food quality. ① A
first judgment about the value of a food source is made on
its appearance and smell. ② Food that looks and smells
attractive is taken into the mouth. ③ The value of a particular
food is an estimation of how good it is, based on its level of
vitamins, minerals, or calories. ④ Here, based on a complex
sensory analysis that is not only restricted to the sense of taste
but also includes smell, touch, and hearing, the final decision
whether to swallow or reject food is made. ⑤ Frequently,
this complex interaction between different senses is
inappropriately referred to as ‘taste’ although it should be
better called flavor perception, because it uses multiple
senses.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Performance must be judged in terms of what is under
the control of the individuals being evaluated rather than
those influences on performance that are beyond their
control. There can be broad, influential factors, sometimes
of an economic nature, that hold down the performance
of everyone being judged. One example is in sales. If there
is a general downturn in the economy and products or
services are not being purchased with the same frequency
as in the previous year, sales could be down, for example,
by an average of 15%. This 15% (actually －15%) figure
would then represent “average” performance. Perhaps the
best salesperson in the year had only a 3% drop in sales
over the previous year. Thus, “good” performance in this
situation is a smaller loss compared to some average or
norm group.
󰀻
In performance evaluation, we should consider (A)
factors affecting the individual’s performance rather than
(B) figures only.
(A) (B)
① contextual …… put aside
② contextual …… rely on
③ controllable …… put aside
④ positive …… ignore
⑤ positive …… rely on
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
We might describe science that has no known practical
value as basic science or basic research. Our exploration of
worlds such as Jupiter would be called basic science, and it is
easy to argue that basic science is not worth the effort and
expense because it has no known practical use. Of course, the
problem is that we have no way of knowing what knowledge
will be of use until we acquire that knowledge. In the middle
of the 19th century, Queen Victoria is supposed to have asked
physicist Michael Faraday what good his experiments with
electricity and magnetism were. He answered, “Madam, what
good is a baby?” Of course, Faraday’s experiments were the
beginning of the electronic age. Many of the practical uses
of scientific knowledge that fill our world ― transistors,
vaccines, plastics ― began as basic research. Basic scientific
research provides the raw materials that technology and
engineering use to solve problems.
Basic scientific research has yet one more important use
that is so valuable it seems an insult to refer to it as merely
functional. Science is the study of nature, and as we learn
more about how nature works, we learn more about what our
existence in this universe means for us. The seemingly
knowledge we gain from space probes to other
worlds tells us about our planet and our own role in the
scheme of nature. Science tells us where we are and what we
are, and that knowledge is beyond value.
* space probe: 우주탐사기(機)
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① What Does Basic Science Bring to Us?
② The Crisis of Researchers in Basic Science
③ Common Goals of Science and Technology
④ Technology: The Ultimate Aim of Basic Science
⑤ Michael Faraday, Frontiersman of the Electronic Age!
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① applicable ② impractical ③ inaccurate
④ priceless ⑤ resourceful
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
The midday sun was glorious. The high school grounds
were filled with well-dressed people, posing in fancy dresses
and suits for cheerful photographers. Congratulations, hugs,
and laughter were contagious. Hannah looked at all the
familiar faces that had been part of (a) her life for the last
few years. Soon her mother would be joining them. She
recalled the first day of school when she had stood in that
same place, in the middle of many anxious freshmen, some
of whom had become her closest friends.
(B)
“Hannah, you look so serious. What are you thinking
about?” “Oh, Mom, just, you know.” Her mother smiled.
“You’ll miss this place, won’t you?” Hannah nodded.
“Quick,” her mother said, “stand over there . . . and smile,
Hannah. You have such a pretty smile.” (b) She hurried out
her cell phone, zoomed in on her daughter, and realized
suddenly that she was looking at a young lady. “You’re all
grown-up,” she whispered. Hannah took more photos with
her teachers in the school garden. She wished all the
memories would remain in her mind forever.
(C)
Hannah struggled with the many class hours, the endless
assignments, and the exams. However, there were exciting
events like sports days and school festivals. How could (c) she
ever forget her second year! She had sung and danced with
her friends in the festival, part of a sensational performance.
After that, she had become more confident and active. Her
thoughts wandering, Hannah vaguely heard her mother’s
voice. “Here you are!” Her mother hurried over, and gave
(d) her a bundle of lilies and roses and a big hug.
(D)
That day was unusually foggy as if something mysterious
were ahead. Hannah was nervous and trembling. The principal
was energetically addressing them, talking of the challenges
and thrills of high school life, but she could not concentrate.
Later, a tall, strict-looking man introduced himself as (e) her
homeroom teacher. The classroom was old, but neat and
inviting. Hannah was seated in the fifth row, hallway side,
even though she had wanted a window seat. High school life
soon proved as challenging as the principal had predicted.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Hannah에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 다른 신입생들과 함께 운동장에 서 있었다.
② 학교 정원에서 선생님들과 사진을 찍었다.
③ 축제에서 노래를 부르고 춤을 추었다.
④ 교장 선생님의 말씀에 집중할 수가 없었다.
⑤ 교실에서 다섯 번째 줄 창가 자리에 앉았다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.