
2016학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지


제3교시
영어영역
		

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.


1.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m not sure she can visit me this time.
② Definitely. She’s excited to move there soon.
③ That’s right. She’s already made plans for me.
④ I don’t think I’m the right person to guide you.
⑤ Unfortunately, she can’t go to Thailand with me.


2.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Well, I’ll just take the soup to the study for him.
② Sure, I can go with him to buy some pumpkins.
③ Okay, I’ll ask him to make some pumpkin soup.
④ I’m sorry, but I’m too busy to clean the study.
⑤ Hmm, I don’t think he likes pumpkin soup.


3.다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
①　학교 입학 절차에 대해 설명하려고
②　개교 기념 행사 참여를 권유하려고
③　등산 시 안전사고 주의를 당부하려고
④　학교 주변 등산로 이용을 안내하려고
⑤　개교 기념 행사 일정 변경을 공지하려고 


4.대화를 듣고, 남자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 공공 미술의 지나친 상업화를 막아야 한다.
② 공공 미술 작품 관리에 더 신경 써야 한다.
③ 공공 미술 설치를 위한 예산을 늘려야 한다.
④ 공공 미술은 지역 경제 발전에 기여해야 한다.
⑤ 공공 미술 작품은 지역의 특성을 반영해야 한다.


5.대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 제빵사-고객
② 기자-사진작가 
③ 요리 강사-수강생
④ 숲 해설사-탐방객 
⑤ 식료품점 주인-요리사
6.대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

①
②
③
④
⑤


7.대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to buy books for the lesson
② to sign up for a violin lesson
③ to take her son to the teacher
④ to ask her son to call the teacher 
⑤ to look for her son in the bookstore

8.대화를 듣고, 남자가 마라톤 대회에 참가하지 않는 이유를 고르시오.
①　참가 신청 시기를 놓쳐서
②　무릎 수술을 받아야 해서
③　마라톤 코스가 변경되어서
④　같이 참가할 사람이 없어서
⑤　훈련을 충분히 하지 못해서

9.대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. 
① $80	② $85	③ $95	④ $100	⑤ $105

10.대화를 듣고, MC Tower에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 개장 연도	② 즐길 거리
③ 교통편	④ 폐장 시간
⑤ 입장료

11.Spring Swimming Festival에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 3월 27일에 Paradise Beach에서 열린다.
② 연날리기 프로그램이 있다.
③ 수영 대회 참가 신청은 당일 오후 3시까지이다.
④ 수영 대회는 무료로 참가한다.
⑤ 보험은 웹사이트에서 신청해야 한다.
12.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 장난감 블록 세트를 고르시오.


Fun & Joy Toy Blocks

Set
Piece
Material
Color
Price
①
A
20
Wood
Yellow
$35
②
B
30
Foam
Green
$40
③
C
35
Wood
Yellow
$45
④
D
45
Foam
Green
$50
⑤
E
50
Foam
Blue
$55


13.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man:                                                     
① They’ll understand safety is the top priority.
② Well, it’ll be the perfect weather for camping.
③ Don’t worry about your kids. They’ll like camping.
④ I feel the same. Outdoor activities make kids tired.
⑤ I’ll be also disappointed if they can’t come with me.

14.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:                                                   
① You can be a good writer without any experience.
② I don’t think so. You should join the drama club first.
③ Yes, your drama club’s performance will be successful. 
④Absolutely. Your acting skill will help you with that job. 
⑤You have much experience in recording stories for the blind.

15.다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ellie가 Ryan에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Ellie:                                                     
① I think we should choose another interesting topic.
② Let’s stick to the topic and focus on the presentation.
③ Why don’t we come up with as many topics as possible?
④ How about entering the research competition together?
⑤We should try hard to save energy for the future.

[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how to choose the right career
② advantages of humans over robots
③ promising occupations in the future
④ jobs likely to be taken over by robots
⑤ use of robots for the safety of workers

17.언급된 직업이 아닌 것은?
① telemarketers	② cashiers
③ umpires	④ restaurant cooks
⑤ mail carriers

이제 듣기ㆍ말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.


18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Ms. Brown,
  We are thankful for the complimentary letter you have sent to us regarding our service. Letters like this keep us motivated and guide us to improve our service. We are pleased about your comment as customers’ satisfaction is the main motto of our service. It’s very rare that the customers take time to give thanks for the services, so we would like to use this letter as an example of the customer’s satisfactory remarks in our new brochure if you give us permission to do so. When people see such remarks from satisfied customers, they trust the service and products more. We hope you will help us in this regard. We will be contacting you soon to hear your decision regarding putting your remarks in the brochure.
Sincerely,
Oliver Watson

① 고객 맞춤 서비스를 홍보하려고
② 서비스 개선을 위한 제안을 부탁하려고
③ 단골 고객을 위한 특별 행사를 알리려고
④ 고객 불만 사항에 대한 시정 조치를 설명하려고
⑤ 홍보 책자에 편지를 싣는 것에 대한 허락을 구하려고

19.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we want something badly for our children, so badly that we behave in ways that aren’t helpful for our kids, it can mean we’re trying to fulfill a need for ourselves. It’s normal to feel good when your child wins, it’s normal to want him to win, but when you need him to win in order to feel good about yourself, you have a problem. For example, do you feel like having a child who is a winner proves you’re a worthwhile parent? Do you crave the recognition of being the parent of a star athlete? If you can answer yes to either question, you may be trying to feel good about yourself through your child’s athletic accomplishments. This is a very common problem. Be willing to take an honest look at yourself. The payoff is tremendous. You become a more aware sports parent who can offer true support and encouragement to your child.
① 전문가의 조언에 따라 자녀 문제에 대처하라.
② 자녀가 다양한 운동을 접할 기회를 제공하라.
③자녀가 시행착오를 통해 성장할 수 있도록 하라.
④자녀가 운동과 학습을 병행할 수 있는 환경을 조성하라.
⑤ 자기 기분을 위해 자녀의 승리를 원하는 게 아닌지 돌아보라.
20.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
The surface of the earth is different from place to place. Places differ in terms of population size, language, resources, environmental factors, industrial specialization, local history, and human activities. It is these differences from place to place that generate the demand for transportation. People want commodities that are not produced locally—for example, fruits, vegetables, televisions, shoes, paper, and thousands of other goods—and this desire generates the demand for transportation. Businesses need resources that are often not available locally, and this need generates the demand for transportation. We work, shop, and seek entertainment, for the most part, outside our own neighborhoods, necessitating a journey to work, to shop, and to visit the multiplex. Transportation enables us to carry out all these activities.
① 지역 간 차이 때문에 수송의 필요성이 생긴다.
② 경제가 발전한 나라일수록 수송 수단이 다양하다.
③경제 수준이 상승하면 여가 활동 시간이 증가한다.
④상품 가격에서 수송비가 차지하는 비중이 줄어들고 있다.
⑤ 환경 보호를 염두에 두고 교통수단을 개발할 필요가 있다.












21.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Tradition is a critical element that cannot be ignored in the creation of architecture. Tradition is the essential element that allows a new work to connect with people on an emotional and intellectual level. The recollection of the familiar is one aspect of design that produces pleasure. This feeling of pleasure or satisfaction exists because we enjoy a sense of security among things that we know and understand. References to a previous tradition are a common component of most major architectural movements. While these movements utilized new technologies and building materials, or invented new building forms, each evoked an emotional response having its roots in an earlier tradition.
① tradition as an important factor in architecture
② efforts to express feelings in various arts
③ innovation in the use of building materials
④ new technologies utilized in modern buildings
⑤ effects of technological innovations on tradition
22.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
There’s no subject you don’t have permission to write about. Students often avoid subjects close to their heart―skateboarding, cheerleading, rock music, cars―because they assume that their teachers will regard these topics as ‘stupid.’ No area of life is stupid to someone who takes it seriously. If you follow your affections, you will write well and will engage your readers. I’ve read elegant books on fishing, mountain climbing, giant sea turtles and many other subjects I didn’t think I was interested in. Write about your hobbies: cooking, gardening, photography, knitting, jogging, sailing, scuba diving. Write about your work: teaching, nursing, running a store. Write about a field you enjoyed in college and always meant to get back to: history, biography, art, archeology. No subject is too specialized if you make an honest connection with it when you write about it.
① Good Reading Leads to Good Writing
② Creativity Comes from Writing Regularly
③ Cultivation of Reading as a Lifetime Habit 
④ Take Criticism from Your Readers Seriously
⑤ Want to Write Well? Go with Your Interests





23.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
     Measures People Take to Maintain Their Physical Health

The above graph shows, by gender, the top five measures people took to maintain their physical health in 2014. ①Above all, the percentage of women was higher than that of men in all measures except in doing exercise. ②Getting enough sleep topped the list for both men and women. ③Eating healthy food was the second most common measure for women, which was true also for men. ④The percentage of the men receiving regular oral care was the same as that of the men spending time with friends and family. ⑤The percentage gap between men and women was the biggest in receiving regular oral care, and was the smallest in getting enough sleep and in doing exercise.
24.Maria Mitchell에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Maria Mitchell was born on August 1, 1818, in Nantucket, Massachusetts. Her awareness for astronomy came to life when her father began to teach her about the stars with the use of his own telescope. At twelve, she aided her father in calculating the exact moment of an annular eclipse. And at seventeen, she opened her very own school for girls, where she taught them science and math. Mitchell rocketed to the forefront of American astronomy when she spotted a comet through her telescope. For her discovery of the comet, she received a gold medal as a recognition from King Frederick VII of Denmark. This gave her worldwide fame, since the only previous women to discover a comet were the astronomers Caroline Herschel and Maria Margarethe Kirch. In 1865 Mitchell became a faculty member at Vassar College, making her the first female astronomy professor in the United States.
*annular eclipse: 금환 일식
① 아버지에게 별에 대해 배웠다.
② 여자아이들을 위한 학교를 열었다.
③ 덴마크 왕으로부터 금메달을 받았다.
④ 혜성을 발견한 최초의 여성이었다.
⑤ Vassar College의 천문학 교수가 되었다.

25.Sandhill Pet Parade에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Sandhill Pet Parade

  Just come with your pet to Madsen Field at 11 a.m., Sunday, March 13.
∎11:00 a.m. Registration	∎11:30 a.m. Parade
∎12:30 p.m. Awards 

  All pets are welcome to participate. Entry is free and no pre­registration is required.
  Pet owners’ costumes are optional but encouraged. Pet costumes are also encouraged.

  Awards will be given for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd place in each category:
∎Large dogs ∎Small dogs ∎Cats and exotic pets

Prizes & Honors include: 
∎PetSmart gift cards and Pets Hotel day camp passes
∎Riding in an open car in the Sandhill Hometown Days Parade on May 20, 2016

  For more information, contact us at info@shparade.net or at (560)135-6789.

① 시상은 오전 11시 30분에 시작한다. 
② 참가비가 있으며 사전 등록을 해야 한다.
③ 참가 의상은 애완동물과 주인 둘 다에게 필수 사항이다. 
④ 각 부문별로 3위까지 시상한다. 
⑤ Hometown Days 행진 때 마차를 타는 수상 특전이 있다.
26.Trash­to­Art 2016에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Trash­to­Art 2016

Celebrate Eco Recycling Center’s 10th anniversary by participating in a trash­to­art contest, sponsored by Hopkins Library.

How to participate:
∙Submissions will be accepted on one day only: Friday, March 25 at Hopkins Library, from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
∙Come see your art on display at Hopkins Library throughout the month of April! During this time, your artwork will be judged by our panel, as well as popular vote.

Categories:	∙Adults (18 & older)
	∙Teens (13-17)
	∙Children (6-12)
Awards: 1st, 2nd, & 3rd place in each category

Guidelines: 
∙Each participant can submit up to two entries.
∙We reserve the right to decline entries that will pose health dangers. 

  Visit ecorecycling.org or call (831)146-1483 to get more information.

① Eco Recycling Center의 10주년 기념 행사이다.
② 출품작 접수는 3월 25일 하루만 가능하다.
③ 출품작은 4월부터 두 달간 Hopkins 도서관에서 전시된다.
④ 참가자당 작품을 최대 두 개까지 제출할 수 있다.
⑤ 건강을 위협하는 출품작은 거부될 수 있다.

27.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Carlos Sanchez’s long­time friend, Frank Sandoval, had fallen on hard times and was about to lose ①his home. Frank’s wife was sick and their two small children were temporarily staying with his mother. Carlos hadn’t talked to Frank for several months and decided one day to call him and see how ②he was. When Frank confided in Carlos about his situation, Carlos immediately went to Frank’s home. When he walked in, ③he was shocked to see his friend so thin and frail. He sat down with Frank and asked him how much money ④he needed. Frank told him it was hopeless, that it was too much to pay back. Carlos pulled out his checkbook and wrote ⑤him a check for fifty thousand dollars. He told Frank that things would get better―and they did. Three years later, Frank paid Carlos back with interest.
28.(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Water has no calories, but it takes up a space in your stomach, which creates a feeling of fullness. Recently, a study found (A)
that/what
 people who drank two glasses of water before meals got full sooner, ate fewer calories, and lost more weight. You can put the same strategy to work by choosing foods that have a higher water content over those with less water. For example, the only difference between grapes and raisins (B)
is/are
 that grapes have about 6 times as much water in them. That water makes a big difference in how much they fill you up. You’ll feel much more satisfied after eating 100 calories’ worth of grapes than you would after eating 100 calories’ worth of raisins. Salad vegetables like lettuce, cucumbers, and tomatoes also have a very high water content, as (C)
are/do
 broth­based soups. 
*broth: 묽은 수프
	(A)	(B)	(C)
① that			is				are
② that			is				do
③ that			are				do
④ what			is				are
⑤ what			are				do



29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
The basic task of the preschool years is to establish a sense of competence and initiative. The core struggle is between initiative and guilt. Preschool children begin to initiate many of their own activities as they become physically and psychologically ready to engage in pursuits of their own ①choosing. If they are allowed realistic freedom to make some of their own decisions, they tend to develop a ②positive orientation characterized by confidence in their ability to initiate and follow through. If their choices are ridiculed, however, they tend to experience a sense of guilt and ultimately to withdraw from taking an ③active stance. One middle­aged woman we talked with still finds herself extremely vulnerable to being seen as ④foolish. She recalls that during her childhood family members laughed at her attempts to perform certain tasks. She took in certain messages she received from her family, and these messages greatly influenced her attitudes and actions. Even now she vividly carries these pictures in her head, and these messages ⑤cease to control her life.
30.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I opened the letter and started reading. I didn’t even read the whole thing. I read only the beginning―where it said, ‘We are pleased to inform you that you have received a scholarship that covers full tuition’―and I started jumping and running around the house. I couldn’t even believe it. I read the letter four more times. My dream school had offered me a full scholarship. That was more money than I could even imagine. All the stress, studying for exams, and staying up late to study―it was all worth it.
① disappointed	② jealous	③ sympathetic
④ annoyed	⑤ delighted


[31~33]다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31.It takes time for water to soften a sponge. When you are telling an employee, lawn service worker, your teenager, or anyone else, what it is that you want them to do, you may just have to repeat the order and instructions several times before the receiver really gets what it is you want done. That’s not bad. That’s normal communication lag. Be ___________. When you are asking someone a question, in an effort to learn a fact that you feel is important for you to know, but they just don’t seem to be willing to give you an answer, take it as a signal that you need to rephrase your question a little and repeat it again, and again, and again, until finally you are heard and answered.
①　patient	②　honest	③　critical
④　thankful	⑤　curious 


32.History is a discipline. It is the art of __________________. As historian John Tosh writes, “All the resources of scholarship and all the historian’s powers of imagination must be harnessed to the task of bringing the past to life—or resurrecting it.” The past is messy, but historians make sense of the mess by collecting evidence, making meaning of it, and organizing it into some kind of discernible pattern. History is an exciting act of interpretation—taking the facts of the past and weaving them into a compelling narrative. The historian works closely with the stuff that has been left behind—documents, oral testimony, objects—to make the past come alive. As John Arnold has noted, “The sources do not ‘speak for themselves’ and never have done so.... They come alive when the historian reanimates them.” [3점]
*discernible: 식별할 수 있는
① predicting the future
② enlightening the youth
③ reconstructing the past
④ analyzing the present
⑤ improving humanity
33.While there is no denying that exceptional players like Emmitt Smith can put points on the board and enhance team success, new research suggests there is a limit to the benefit top talents bring to a team. Researchers compared the amount of individual talent on teams with the teams’ success, and they found striking examples of _________________________________________. The researchers looked at three sports: basketball, soccer, and baseball. In each sport, they calculated both the percentage of top talent on each team and the teams’ success over several years. For both basketball and soccer, they found that top talent did in fact predict team success, but only up to a point. Furthermore, there was not simply a point of diminishing returns with respect to top talent; there was in fact a cost. Basketball and soccer teams with the greatest proportion of elite athletes performed worse than those with more moderate proportions of top level players. [3점]
*diminishing returns: 수확 체감
① more talent hurting the team
② practice leading to perfection
③ top players being more cooperative
④ coaches being the key to team management
⑤ supporters interrupting the flow of the game


34.다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
[3점]
Healthy living in individuals lays the foundation for healthy living throughout society and the world. For instance, healthy relationships depend upon healthy individuals sharing personally and working mutually to develop win­win agreements on how to grow and maintain the relationship.        (A)   , healthy parenting depends upon healthy parents. Children learn the foundations of how the world works and how to develop their personal reality relative to the consciousness and behaviors of their parents. They model and subconsciously embrace much of their parents’ behavior, so it becomes their own. Thus, the beliefs and behaviors of parents provide psychological and social information to the children that function almost like food does for the body; in this case, the information helps build their personal realities and shape their behaviors.    (B)   , psychological, social, as well as the physical diets provided by parents must all be healthy or the children learn to repeat the unhealthy patterns of their parents.
	(A)	     (B)
① Similarly			On the contrary
② Similarly			Consequently
③ For example			On the contrary
④ However			Otherwise
⑤ However			Consequently
[35~36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
35.

  Gold is a relatively soft metal, so much so that rings are very rarely made from pure gold metal because they get scratched quickly.

(A)The answer is that they sit inside the gold crystal structure, taking the place of a gold atom, and it is this atom substitution inside the crystal lattice of the gold that makes it stronger.
(B)But if you alloy gold, by adding a small percentage of other metals such as silver or copper, you not only change the color of the gold—silver making the gold whiter, and copper making the gold redder—you make the gold harder, much harder. 
(C)This changing of the properties of metals by very small additions of other ingredients is what makes the study of metals so fascinating. In the case of gold alloys, you might wonder where the silver atoms go. 
*crystal lattice: 결정격자    **alloy: 합금(하다)
① (A)－(C)－(B)	② (B)－(A)－(C)
③ (B)－(C)－(A)	④ (C)－(A)－(B)
⑤ (C)－(B)－(A)

36.

  A female lawyer working for a prestigious New York law firm once accompanied the male CEO of a major client to Latin America to negotiate a complex deal.

(A)It was the local practice, the colleague suggested, for lawyers to negotiate only with other lawyers, not with the businesspeople. Had the woman lawyer insisted on participating, she would have spoiled the deal and destroyed her credibility.
(B)Before voicing her objections, however, she called a colleague back in New York, who told her that he, too, had been excluded from preliminary talks during his last negotiation in that country. The Latin American executive was just looking for a diplomatic way to get her out of the picture as a lawyer, not as a woman.
(C)Soon after they arrived, the head of the prospective Latin American partner suggested that he and the CEO go off together to discuss business―while his wife and the lawyer go shopping. The lawyer was outraged, assuming this to be an example of Latin American gender bias.
① (A)－(C)－(B)	② (B)－(A)－(C)
③ (B)－(C)－(A)	④ (C)－(A)－(B)
⑤ (C)－(B)－(A)
[37~38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37.

People who struggle in retirement are those who still have a “get rich quick” mentality.

The most successful retirees are those who look at retirement as a long endeavor that can last 20 or 30 years or longer. (①) They don’t throw all of their years of preparation away by investing in the next “hot stock” or investment idea. (②) They’re very careful with their finances; they know they have to make sure that their money will last for the rest of their lives. (③) They stay conservative and focused on a finish line that is years and years away. (④) Even though they no longer have the comfort of a paycheck coming in, they still put their retirement nest egg at risk by chasing every hot tip that they get. (⑤) In other words, they are looking for short cuts to bring them financial stability and peace of mind.
*nest egg: 노후 자금






38.

However, during the same period, there has been no comparable worldwide advance in ethical behavior.

Over the past century, society has witnessed extraordinary advances in medicine, science, and technology. (①) These advances came about because an individual, or many individuals, used the full resources of his or her intellectual imagination to solve problems that had previously been thought to be unsolvable. (②) That is, in part, because human beings rarely use the full resources of their intellect to solve moral problems. (③) Exercising moral imagination means using our intelligence to devise creative and innovative ways to help others. (④) Concerning charity, for example, it means not only providing immediate assistance to the impoverished, but also helping the poor in ways that will enable them to support themselves and no longer need help. (⑤) Therefore, in any situation in which help is required, we should use our intelligence to discover the most effective and loving way to help those in need. [3점]
*impoverished: 빈곤한
39.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
By some estimates, music based on oral tradition had previously seldom been performed for more than one or two generations. ①By contrast, with the coming of records not only were the “classics” preserved, but formerly ephemeral “hits” could now survive as “oldies.” ②So the music of one generation’s youth could be replayed years later to evoke memories in some (often quite narrow) age group of people. ③Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms of course survived well beyond their social and cultural settings, taking on new meanings in the recordable world. ④Bach mostly followed the complex rules of his day, while Beethoven challenged the rules, thus creating a new musical era. ⑤Memories of falling in love or just being free and having fun also came to be linked to tunes that could be recalled or replayed again and again throughout life, thanks to the recording.
*ephemeral: 수명이 짧은

40.다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

  People tell about their own experiences all the time, but they do not necessarily tell about the same experience in the same way every time. The telling process, even in the relating of a firsthand experience, can be a highly inventive process. That is, the art of storytelling involves finding good ways to express one’s experiences in a way appropriate to the listener. A fine line exists, therefore, between invented stories and the relation of firsthand experiences. The entertainment factor exists in relating firsthand experiences just as it does in inventing stories. Nobody wants to listen to what happened to you today unless you can make what happened appear interesting. The process of livening up an experience can involve simply telling that experience in such a way as to eliminate the dullest parts, or it also can involve ‘improving’ the dull parts by playing with the facts.
*relate: 이야기하다

󰀻

When we narrate our firsthand experiences, we tend to   (A) what happened in order to make our story (B)   for the listeners.

	(A)	      (B)
① modify			reliable
② modify			enjoyable
③ reveal			reliable
④ memorize			enjoyable
⑤ memorize			comprehensible
[41~42]다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

  Ta­Nahesi Coates, a senior editor at The Atlantic Monthly, ran a personal blog for years. Coates posts daily on a wide array of subjects: movies, politics, economic inequalities, the Civil War, TV shows, favorite poems, or whether pro football is too dangerous to play. Coates, who is African American, is also well known as an eloquent writer on race, and he posts about that frequently. Yet his blog is amazingly abuse­free: comments spill into the hundreds without going off the rails. “This is the most hot­button issue in America, and folks have managed to keep a fairly level head,” he says. 
  The secret is the work Coates puts into his discussion board. Before he was a blogger himself, he’d noticed the terrible comments at his favorite political blogs. Coates realized that negative comments create a loop: they poison the atmosphere, chasing off productive posters. So when he started his own personal blog, he decided to break that loop. The instant he saw something abusive, he’d delete it, banning repeat offenders. Meanwhile, he went out of his way to encourage the smart folks, responding to them personally and publicly, so they’d be encouraged to stay and talk. And Coates was unfailingly polite and courteous himself, to help set community standards. Soon several dozen regular commenters emerged, and they got to know each other, talking as much to each other as to Coates. Their cohesion helped cement the culture of            even more; anyone today who looks at the blog can quickly tell this community isn’t going to tolerate nastiness. 

41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
① A Successful Blogger Knows How to Manage Comments
② Blogging Is a Good Way to Promote Your Business
③ Blog: A Window to See Another Foreign Culture
④ Share Hobbies with People Through Your Blog
⑤ Personal Information Slips Out of Your Blog

42.윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① civility	② competition	③ independence
④ disbelief	⑤ privacy

[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

  The last Saturday of each month was always a highlight in Adrian’s life. He and his dad had a regular fishing date. Adrian learned a lot about fishing and about life on these expeditions. (a)His father pointed out that there are some rocks that are too dangerous to go onto, even when the sea looks calm. It might look like a perfect spot for fishing, but rocks that are too close to the water’s edge can be deceptively dangerous.

(B)

  When he did so, he started catching really big fish―and his mom was delighted with the fresh fish she could cook for supper. Adrian gradually realized that it pays to listen to people with experience and knowledge of dangerous places. He also realized how stupid it was not to listen to his dad who gave (b)him precious advice free of charge!

(C)

  On top of that, (c)he soon knew exactly how to make fishermen’s knots and how to untie tricky knots in his fishing lines. But Adrian wasn’t always keen to take his dad’s advice. When his dad showed him how to bait his hook, (d)he said that a little piece of the hook should always stick out, but Adrian thought otherwise. He thought it logical for the bait to hide the hook, so he ignored his dad―but after quite a few days of catching nothing, decided to follow his dad’s advice.

(D)

  Many careless fishermen had lost their lives on these rocks. Concrete crosses marked the spots where these people had been swept into the sea. Adrian had had a few narrow escapes when he had ventured too close to the edge. (e)He quickly learned to respect the mighty waters of the ocean. Adrian’s dad also taught him which kinds of bait were suitable for catching various kinds of fish, and he also learned which sinkers were right for the different fishing areas.
*sinker: (낚싯줄의) 추, 봉돌

43.주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C)	② (C)-(B)-(D)
③ (C)-(D)-(B)	④ (D)-(B)-(C)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)

44.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c) 	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글의 Adrian에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 아버지와 함께 정기적으로 낚시를 갔다.
② 올라가면 너무 위험한 바위가 몇 군데 있다는 말을 들었다.
③ 큰 물고기를 잡아 어머니께 드려 어머니를 기쁘게 했다.
④ 아버지의 조언에 따랐지만 며칠간 아무것도 잡지 못했다.
⑤ 물고기의 종류에 따라 어떤 미끼가 적합한지 배웠다.


※확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.


1
8
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Actually, Mom’s not here.
② Yes, he’s coming home soon.
③ Right. I won’t go to the party.
④ No, we didn’t order the gift yet.
⑤ Great. Let’s buy one at the store.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll never be late for class again.
② Right. You’ve got lots of time to finish.
③ Really? I’d better get started right away.
④ What? I’ve already written up the report.
⑤ I see. I hope you can finish yours by tomorrow.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 학생회장 선거를 홍보하려고
② 교통 봉사 참여를 독려하려고
③ 무단 횡단 자제를 당부하려고
④ 안전 교육 일정을 안내하려고
⑤ 주차 문제 해결을 촉구하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 점심시간 중 여가 활동의 장점
② 직장 동료들과 잘 지내는 방법
③ 스트레스 해소와 건강과의 관계
④ 독서가 정신 건강에 미치는 효과
⑤ 밴드 공연 시 악기 구성의 중요성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 아나운서 － 리포터
② 출판업자 － 소설가
③ 신문 편집자 － 만화가
④ 잡지 기자 － 문학 비평가
⑤ 영화 제작자 － 시나리오 작가
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 예약 날짜 변경하기 ② 할인 쿠폰 출력하기
③ 레스토랑 예약하기 ④ 기념사진 촬영하기
⑤ 저녁상 차리기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 조퇴하려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 운전면허 시험에 응시하려고
② 동생을 집에 데려다 주려고
③ 부모님 댁을 방문하려고
④ 병원 진료를 받으려고
⑤ 워크숍에 참석하려고
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $270 ② $290 ③ $300 ④ $320 ⑤ $360
10. 대화를 듣고, Sunrise Korean Folk Village 관광에 관해
두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 체험 활동 내용 ② 참가 비용
③ 식사 포함 여부 ④ 참가 인원수
⑤ 소요 시간
11. Pine Tree Family Park에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① Evergreen 호숫가에 위치하고 있다.
② 두 달 전에 새롭게 단장했다.
③ 1인당 입장료를 인하했다.
④ 셔틀버스를 30분마다 운행한다.
⑤ 공원 크기를 늘렸다.
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 침낭을 고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Cheer up! You’ll do better next time.
② Sure. Let’s go to the rock concert together.
③ I agree. The advanced level is right for you.
④ You’re doing a good job. We’re almost there.
⑤ Come on! Once you see it, you’ll want to try it.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Right. We can’t ignore complaints about the staff.
② Of course. Air conditioners will be very expensive.
③ Yeah, but it’s important to keep our students happy.
④ Then, I’ll teach you how to use the computer program.
⑤ Really? Sorry to hear the computer classes will be closed.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Mike가 Susan에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Mike:
① I had a great time shopping at the market.
② I wouldn’t change my mind if I were you.
③ You can repair your camera at the department store.
④ You should go to the department store this weekend.
⑤ I wish I had gone to the electronics market with you.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① effects and uses of colors
② functions and uses of shapes
③ ways of constructing buildings
④ types and purposes of buildings
⑤ color preferences and personalities
17. 언급된 장소가 아닌 것은?
① 은행 ② 호텔 ③ 병원 ④ 학교 ⑤ 사무실
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Ms. Molly Oliver,
This is Mark Foster, one of the volunteers for the
Auditory Frog and Toad Survey. Unfortunately, I was not
able to participate in the orientation last weekend, so I
could not receive training in distinguishing the sounds of
frogs and toads. I heard from another participant that a CD
was used in the training session. I was wondering if you
could send me one. Since we have ten more days before
the survey begins, I’ll have enough time to receive and use
the CD to train myself. You can send it to me at the
address in my application. I am looking forward to hearing
from you soon. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Mark Foster
① 자원 봉사 참가를 취소하려고
② CD를 보내 줄 수 있는지 문의하려고
③ 신청서에 기입한 주소를 수정하려고
④ 양서류 생태 조사 일정을 확인하려고
⑤ 오리엔테이션에 참석할 수 없음을 알리려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘she’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
When she heard the dogs barking fiercely on the floor just
above her, she trembled uncontrollably for fear of being
caught. Drops of cold sweat rolled down her back. Before
slipping into the hold of the boat, she had scattered powder,
which Swedish scientists had developed, unnoticeably on the
floor above in order to distract the dogs. But she knew that
these dogs were so well trained that they could smell her, even
though a load of fish had been dumped over her hiding place.
She held her hands together tightly and tried not to make any
noise. She was not sure how long she could stay like that. To
her relief, it wasn’t long before a whistle called the dogs out,
leaving her unfound. She relaxed her hands and exhaled a
deep breath. She felt safe now.
① terrified → relieved ② delighted → frustrated
③ scared → annoyed ④ bored → excited
⑤ disappointed → exhausted
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Have you ever met someone while you were experiencing
significant emotional, psychological, or physical stress?
Perhaps you stayed up all night studying for a final, or maybe
you learned that a grandparent recently died. You likely
exhibited behaviors that are not consistent with how you
usually act. Meeting someone when you are extremely
stressed can create an inaccurate impression of you. For this
reason, recognize that our first impressions of others also may
be perceptual errors. To help avoid committing these errors,
engage in perception checking, which means that we consider
a series of questions to confirm or challenge our perceptions
of others and their behaviors. For example, see if you can
provide two possible interpretations for the verbal and
nonverbal behavior observed and seek clarification of it in
order to determine the accuracy of your evaluation.
① 상대방에 대한 자신의 인식에 오류가 없는지 점검하라.
② 정신적 스트레스가 심할 때는 타인과의 만남을 피하라.
③ 처음 만나는 사람에게 좋은 인상을 주도록 노력하라.
④ 상대방의 심리를 파악하고 자신의 감정을 표현하라.
⑤ 언어적 행동과 비언어적 행동을 일치시켜라.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we see a happy face (or an angry one), it subtly
generates the corresponding emotion in us. To the degree we
take on the pace, posture, and facial expression of another
person, we start to inhabit their emotional space; as our body
mimics the other’s, we begin to experience emotional
matching. Our nervous system is automatically set to engage
in this emotional empathy. But how well we use this capacity
is largely a learned ability. Animals－and people－who have
been raised in extreme social isolation are poor at reading
emotional cues in those around them not because they lack the
basic circuitry for empathy but because, lacking emotional
tutors, they have never learned to pay attention to these
messages and so haven’t practiced this skill.
① 긍정적인 감정은 더 많은 공감을 불러일으킨다.
② 사람과 동물은 모방하는 능력에서 차이를 보인다.
③ 타인과 공감하는 능력을 잘 사용하려면 학습이 필요하다.
④ 얼굴 표정은 상대방의 감정을 파악하는 중요한 단서이다.
⑤ 인간이 타인과 공감하는 정도는 신경계에 의해 결정된다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we hear a story, we look for beliefs that are being
commented upon. Any story has many possible beliefs
inherent in it. But how does someone listening to a story find
those beliefs? We find them by looking through the beliefs we
already have. We are not as concerned with what we are
hearing as we are with finding what we already know that is
relevant. Picture it in this way. As understanders, we have a
list of beliefs, indexed by subject area. When a new story
appears, we attempt to find a belief of ours that relates to it.
When we do, we find a story attached to that belief and
compare the story in our memory to the one we are
processing. Our understanding of the new story becomes, at
that point, a function of the old story. Once we find a belief
and connected story, we need no further processing; that is,
the search for other beliefs stops.
① the use of a new story in understanding an old story
② the limits of our memory capacity in recalling stories
③ the influence of new stories on challenging our beliefs
④ the most efficient strategy to improve storytelling skills
⑤ the role of our existing beliefs in comprehending a new story
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Savannas pose a bit of a problem for ecologists. There is an
axiom in ecology that ‘complete competitors cannot coexist’:
in other words, where two populations of organisms use
exactly the same resources, one would be expected to do so
slightly more efficiently than the other and therefore come to
dominate in the long term. In temperate parts of the world,
either trees dominate (in forests) or grasses dominate (in
grasslands). Yet, in savannas grasses and trees coexist. The
classic explanation proposes that trees have deep roots while
grasses have shallow roots. The two plant types are therefore
able to coexist because they are not in fact competitors: the
trees increase in wetter climates and on sandier soils because
more water is able to penetrate to the deep roots. Trees do
indeed have a few small roots which penetrate to great depth,
but most of their roots are in the top half-metre of the soil, just
where the grass roots are.
* axiom: 원리, 공리
① A War at Hand Between Plants in Savannas
② A Rivalry for Wetter Soils among Savanna Trees
③ Are Savannas a Hidden Treasure of Bio-Diversity?
④ Cyclic Dominance of Trees over Grasses in Savannas
⑤ Strange Companions: Savanna Plants Confuse Ecologists
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the Western Hemisphere oil
production per day in 2010 and proven oil reserves as of 2011
for selected countries. ① The United States recorded 9.65
million barrels of daily oil production in 2010, the greatest
daily oil production among the countries shown on the graph.
② Canada had the second largest daily oil production followed
by Mexico and Brazil, with Venezuela recording the lowest
among the five countries in 2010. ③ As for proven oil reserves,
however, Venezuela recorded the largest amount among these
countries in 2011, possessing 211.2 billion barrels, followed by
Canada with 175.2 billion barrels. ④ In 2011, the sum of the
proven oil reserves of the United States, Mexico, and Brazil
was greater than those of Venezuela. ⑤ Brazil had larger
proven oil reserves than Mexico in 2011, but the daily oil
production of Brazil was lower than that of Mexico in 2010.
* proven oil reserves: 확인된 석유 매장량
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. Sequoyah에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Sequoyah, a Cherokee Indian, was born in about 1770 in
Taskigi, now in Tennessee. Raised by his Cherokee mother,
the young Sequoyah never learned to read or write English.
While interacting with English speakers, he realized the
necessity of a writing system for the Cherokee people. In
about 1809, Sequoyah began developing a system of writing,
adapting letters from English, Greek, and Hebrew. By 1821,
he had created a system of 86 symbols, representing all the
syllables of the Cherokee language. The Cherokee people
began to use the system in their schools and publish books
and newspapers in their language. In 1824, the General
Council of the Eastern Cherokees awarded Sequoyah a medal
in honor of his accomplishment. Sequoyah moved to
Oklahoma some years later and died in what is now Texas in
1843. And later, people remembered him by naming a certain
tree species “Sequoia.”
* syllable: 음절
① 1770년경 Taskigi에서 태어났다.
② 어린 시절에 영어를 읽고 쓰는 법을 배웠다.
③ Cherokee 사람들을 위한 문자 체계의 필요성을 깨달았다.
④ 업적을 인정받아 1824년에 메달을 받았다.
⑤ 1843년에 지금의 Texas에서 세상을 떠났다.
26. Kingston Badminton Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 일주일에 3일씩 4주 동안 운영된다.
② 오후 6시에는 15세 이상을 대상으로 진행된다.
③ 개인용 사물함을 이용하려면 추가 비용이 든다.
④ 등록 마감일은 6월 10일이다.
⑤ 배드민턴 라켓과 셔틀콕을 제공한다.
27. 16th Springvale Book Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
① 6월 4일부터 5일간 개최된다.
② 작가들의 강연이 오전에 예정되어 있다.
③ 행사장에서 구매한 책에 한정하여 작가들이 사인을 해 준다.
④ 웹 사이트에서 행사 정보 앱(app)을 내려 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 일부 프로그램의 경우 입장료를 지불해야 한다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
If an animal is innately programmed for some type of
behaviour, then there ① are likely to be biological clues. It is
no accident that fish have bodies which are streamlined and
② smooth, with fins and a powerful tail. Their bodies are
structurally adapted for moving fast through the water.
Similarly, if you found a dead bird or mosquito, you could
guess by looking at ③ its wings that flying was its normal
mode of transport. However, we must not be over-optimistic.
Biological clues are not essential. The extent to which they are
④ finding varies from animal to animal and from activity to
activity. For example, it is impossible to guess from their
bodies that birds make nests, and, sometimes, animals behave
in a way quite contrary to ⑤ what might be expected from
their physical form: ghost spiders have tremendously long
legs, yet they weave webs out of very short threads. To a
human observer, their legs seem a great hindrance as they spin
and move about the web.
Kingston Badminton Program
Are you looking for a simple and effective sports
program? Then check out the Kingston Badminton
Program and choose one of our courses taught by the
most experienced badminton coaches.
∙Course sessions will be held three days a week
(Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays) for 4 weeks
from June 20 to July 15.
3:00 p.m.－4:00 p.m.: Ages 7－10
4:30 p.m.－5:30 p.m.: Ages 11－14
6:00 p.m.－7:00 p.m.: Ages 15 and up
∙The tuition fee is $50 per person with a free personal
locker.
∙The deadline for registration is June 10.
∙Badminton rackets and shuttlecocks are provided.
For further information, call the Kingston Community
Center at 322－480－5267.
16th Springvale Book Festival
Saturday, June 4, 10 a.m.－5 p.m.
Springvale Public Library
(4536 Main Street, Springvale, WI)
Mark your calendar for the 16th Springvale Book
Festival. This is your big chance to meet the nation’s
BEST authors and discuss their works.
Authors will be speaking at the main hall on the 2nd
floor from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.
Note: Authors will be signing books in the lobby, so
please bring your own personal copies or you can
purchase books on site.
Get the most out of your big day by downloading the
festival app at our website (www.spvbf.org). It features
a complete list of all events & locations, maps, and ways
to share it all via social media.
All programs will be FREE of charge!
Please visit our website for more information about
the festival.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
In 2001, researchers at Wayne State University asked a
group of college volunteers to exercise for twenty minutes at a
(A) preset / self-selected pace on each of three machines: a
treadmill, a stationary bike, and a stair climber. Measurements
of heart rate, oxygen consumption, and perceived effort were
taken throughout all three workouts. The researchers expected
to find that the subjects unconsciously targeted the same
relative physiological intensity in each activity. Perhaps they
would (B) automatically / intentionally exercise at 65 percent
of their maximum heart rate regardless of which machine they
were using. Or maybe they would instinctively settle into
rhythm at 70 percent of their maximum rate of oxygen
consumption in all three workouts. But that’s not what
happened. There was, in fact, no (C) consistency / variation
in measurements of heart rate and oxygen consumption across
the three disciplines. Instead, the subjects were found to have
chosen the same level of perceived effort on the treadmill, the
bike, and the stair climber.
* treadmill: 러닝머신
** physiological: 생리학적인
(A) (B) (C)
① preset …… intentionally …… consistency
② preset …… automatically …… variation
③ self-selected …… intentionally …… variation
④ self-selected …… intentionally …… consistency
⑤ self-selected …… automatically …… consistency
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
In the summer of 1972, the actor Anthony Hopkins was
signed to play a leading role in a film based on George
Feifer’s novel The Girl from Petrovka. That is why ① he
traveled to London to buy a copy of the book. Unfortunately,
none of the main London bookstores had a copy. Then, on his
way home, waiting for an underground train at Leicester
Square tube station, he saw a discarded book lying on the seat
next to ② him. It was a copy of The Girl from Petrovka. As if
that was not coincidence enough, more was to follow. Later,
when ③ he had a chance to meet the author, Hopkins told him
about this strange occurrence. Feifer was interested. He said to
④ him that in November 1971 he had lent a friend a copy of
the book—a unique copy in which he had made notes on
turning the British English into American English for the
publication of an American version—but his friend had lost
the copy in London. A quick check of the copy Hopkins had
found showed that it was the very same copy that ⑤ his friend
had mislaid.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Once a hand or gripper has been directed to an object by
reaching, it can be grasped. Grasping requires that fingers hold
an object securely. A secure grip is one in which the object
won’t slip or move, especially when displaced by an external
force. Your grasp on a hammer, for example, would not be
secure if knocking against something caused you to drop it.
One precondition of a firm grasp is that the forces applied by
the fingers balance each other so as not to disturb the object’s
position. The characteristics of an object such as its geometric
configuration and mass distribution may demand that some
fingers apply greater force than others to maintain .
The grasp and support forces must also match overall object
mass and fragility. An egg requires a more delicate touch than
a rock. [3점]
* geometric configuration: 기하학적 형태
** fragility: 부서지기 쉬움
① distance ② efficiency
③ mobility ④ direction
⑤ stability
32. What story could be harsher than that of the Great Auk, the
large black-and-white seabird that in northern oceans took the
ecological place of a penguin? Its tale rises and falls like a
Greek tragedy, with island populations savagely destroyed by
humans until almost all were gone. Then the very last colony
found safety on a special island, one protected from the
destruction of humankind by vicious and unpredictable ocean
currents. These waters presented no problem to perfectly
adapted seagoing birds, but they prevented humans from
making any kind of safe landing. After enjoying a few years
of comparative safety, disaster of a different kind struck the
Great Auk. Volcanic activity caused the island refuge to sink
completely beneath the waves, and surviving individuals were
forced to find shelter elsewhere. The new island home they
chose in one
terrible way. Humans could access it with comparative ease,
and they did! Within just a few years the last of this
once-plentiful species was entirely eliminated. [3점]
* savagely: 잔혹하게
① lacked the benefits of the old
② denied other colonies easy access
③ faced unexpected natural disasters
④ caused conflicts among the refugees
⑤ had a similar disadvantage to the last island
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. It is not hard to see that a strong economy, where
opportunities are plentiful and jobs go begging,
. Biased employers
may still dislike hiring members of one group or another, but
when nobody else is available, discrimination most often
gives way to the basic need to get the work done. The same
goes for employees with prejudices about whom they do and
do not like working alongside. In the American construction
boom of the late 1990s, for example, even the carpenters’
union—long known as a “traditional bastion of white men, a
world where a coveted union card was handed down from
father to son”—began openly encouraging women, blacks,
and Hispanics to join its internship program. At least in the
workplace, jobs chasing people obviously does more to
promote a fluid society than people chasing jobs. [3점]
* bastion: 요새
** coveted: 부러움을 사는
① allows employees to earn more income
② helps break down social barriers
③ simplifies the hiring process
④ increases wage discrimination
⑤ improves the productivity of a company
34. One remarkable aspect of aboriginal culture is the concept
of “totemism,” where the tribal member at birth assumes the
soul and identity of a part of nature. This view of the earth and
its riches as an intrinsic part of oneself clearly rules out
mistreatment of the environment because this would only
constitute a destruction of self. Totems are more than objects.
They include spiritual rituals, oral histories, and the
organization of ceremonial lodges where records of the past
travel routes of the soul can be exchanged with others and
converted to mythology. The primary motivation is the
preservation of tribal myths and a consolidation and sharing of
every individual’s origins in nature. The aborigines see
,
through a hierarchy of totems that connect to their ancestral
origins, a cosmology that places them at one with the earth, and
behavior patterns that respect ecological balance. [3점]
* aboriginal: 원주민의
** consolidation: 병합, 강화
① themselves as incompatible with nature and her riches
② their mythology as a primary motive toward individualism
③ their identity as being self-contained from surrounding nature
④ their relationship to the environment as a single harmonious
continuum
⑤ their communal rituals as a gateway to distancing themselves
from their origins
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Roles are like a fence. They allow us a certain amount of
freedom, but for most of us that freedom doesn’t go very far.
Suppose that a woman decides that she is not going to wear
dresses—or a man that he will not wear suits and ties—
regardless of what anyone says. ① In most situations, they’ll
stick to their decision. ② When a formal occasion comes
along, however, such as a family wedding or a funeral, they
are likely to cave in to norms that they find overwhelming.
③ The increasing social pressure discourages us from
fulfilling the social norms and committing ourselves to shared
social conventions of behaviour. ④ Almost all of us follow
the guidelines for what is “appropriate” for our roles. ⑤ Few
of us are bothered by such restrictions, for our socialization is
so thorough that we usually want to do what our roles indicate
is appropriate.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
The ancient Greeks sought to improve memory through
brain training methods such as memory palaces and the
method of loci. At the same time, they and the Egyptians
became experts at externalizing information, inventing the
modern library, a grand storehouse for externalized
knowledge.
(A) This need isn’t simply learned; it is a biological imperative—
animals organize their environments instinctively. Most
mammals are biologically programmed to put their
digestive waste away from where they eat and sleep.
(B) We don’t know why these simultaneous explosions of
intellectual activity occurred when they did (perhaps daily
human experience had hit a certain level of complexity).
But the human need to organize our lives, our
environment, even our thoughts, remains strong.
(C) Dogs have been known to collect their toys and put them
in baskets; ants carry off dead members of the colony to
burial grounds; certain birds and rodents create barriers
around their nests in order to more easily detect invaders.
* method of loci: 장소를 활용한 기억법
** rodent: 설치류 동물
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
Imitation seems to be a key to the transmission of
valuable practices among nonhumans. The most famous
example is that of the macaque monkeys on the island of
Koshima in Japan.
(A) In the early 1950s, Imo, a one-year-old female macaque,
somehow hit upon the idea of washing her sweet potatoes
in a stream before eating them. Soon it was hard to find a
Koshima macaque who wasn’t careful to wash off her
sweet potato before eating it.
(B) Imo, though, realized that if you threw a handful of wheat
and sand into the ocean, the sand would sink and the
wheat would float. Again, within a few years most of her
fellow macaques were throwing wheat and sand into the
sea and obtaining the benefits.
(C) A few years later, Imo introduced another innovation.
Researchers on the island occasionally gave the monkeys
wheat (in addition to sweet potatoes). But the wheat was
given to them on the beach, where it quickly became
mixed with sand.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
That is why people experience jet lag when traveling
across time zones.
In humans, body clocks are responsible for daily changes in
blood pressure, body temperature, hormones, hunger, and
thirst, as well as our sleep-wake cycles. ( ① ) These biological
rhythms, which we experience as internal time, are probably
older than sleep, developed over the course of millions of years
of evolution. ( ② ) They facilitate physiological and
behavioral changes on a roughly twenty-four-hour cycle no
matter what is happening outside, whether a cold front moves
in or clouds block the light of the sun. ( ③ ) Their internal
clocks continue to run in accordance with the place they left
behind, not the one to which they have come, and it can take
some time to realign the two. ( ④ ) The most remarkable thing
is that our internal body clocks can be readjusted by
environmental cues. ( ⑤ ) We may get jet lag for a few days
when we ask our body clocks to adapt to a vastly different
schedule of day and night cycles on the other side of the Earth,
but they can do it. [3점]
* facilitate: 쉽게 하다
** realign: 재조정하다
39.
For example, the first step in servicing or installing
equipment is talking with the clients to understand how
they used the equipment.
The customer service representatives in an electronics firm
under major restructuring were told they had to begin selling
service contracts for their equipment in addition to installing
and repairing them. This generated a great deal of resistance.
( ① ) To the service representatives, learning to sell was a
very different game from what they had been playing. ( ② )
But it turned out they already knew a lot more about sales
than they thought. ( ③ ) The same is true in selling. ( ④ )
The salesperson first has to learn about the customer’s needs.
( ⑤ ) The service representatives also had a great deal of
product knowledge and hands-on experience, which is
obviously important in sales.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Lawyers and scientists use argument to mean a summary
of evidence and principles leading to a conclusion;
however, a scientific argument is different from a legal
argument. A prosecuting attorney constructs an argument
to persuade the judge or a jury that the accused is guilty; a
defense attorney in the same trial constructs an argument
to persuade the same judge or jury toward the opposite
conclusion. Neither prosecutor nor defender is obliged to
consider anything that weakens their respective cases. On
the contrary, scientists construct arguments because they
want to test their own ideas and give an accurate
explanation of some aspect of nature. Scientists can
include any evidence or hypothesis that supports their
claim, but they must observe one fundamental rule of
professional science. They must include all of the known
evidence and all of the hypotheses previously proposed.
Unlike lawyers, scientists must explicitly account for the
possibility that they might be wrong.
󰀻
Unlike lawyers, who utilize information (A) to
support their arguments, scientists must include all
information even if some of it is unlikely to (B)
their arguments.
(A) (B)
① objectively …… weaken
② objectively …… support
③ accurately …… clarify
④ selectively …… strengthen
⑤ selectively …… disprove
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The idea of protecting intellectual activity and creation has
deep roots. The ancient Greeks used an awards system to
(A) design achievements, which performed some of
the same functions as the modern patent system. Their
pottery, sculptures, and other manufactured goods had
symbols on them to note the tradesmen who created them,
which are the predecessors of modern trademarks. Similar
marks and symbols functioning as trademarks have been
found on Chinese pottery, possibly dating as far back as
2698 BCE, and in many other ancient societies, including the
Egyptians, the Assyrians, and the Vedic civilization.
The concept of intellectual property continued to develop
during the Roman period. The Roman Empire had an
incredible variety of trademarks. Roman potters alone used
approximately 6,000 trademarks. Additionally, Roman
authors had a sense that their intellectual creations were
(B) , as they complained about the exploitation of
those creations. Their sense of injustice was probably
heightened by the fact that there were laws and traditions in
place that supported their belief that only they could exploit
their creations. Roman authors could, in fact, make money
from the copying and publishing of their works because the
value of their intellectual creations was recognized.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Early Development of Intellectual Property Protection
② History of Roman Intellectual Property Law
③ How the Romans Protected Their Properties
④ Increasing Demand to Protect Ancient Artifacts
⑤ Why Trademarks Were Exploited in Early Civilizations
42. 윗글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
(A) (B)
① recognize …… valuable
② recognize …… outdated
③ honor …… ignorable
④ suspend …… imitable
⑤ suspend …… significant
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Richard was watching people on the street through the
window. Skirts were bouncing lightly and pants were
dancing delightedly in the seasonable weather as the spring
breeze chased them playfully. Some seemed excited, walking
like racing cars between passersby. He had ordered two
black coffees, one for himself and one for his friend, Julie.
She was running late, but the service was fast. The hot
coffees were promptly placed in front of (a) him.
(B)
Handing a spray can of cream over to Richard, the waiter
said, “Add it now if you want.” Richard couldn’t help asking
him why. (b) The blue-shirted man answered, “Actually,
hotter coffee loses energy faster than coffee cooled slightly
by the addition of cream.” “Really? Is that so?” The waiter
kindly smiled and said, “Yeah, I just learned it when I took a
class about coffee.” He also taught (c) his customer how to
make shapes with the cream. Richard paid close attention to
his explanation.
(C)
Looking at the coffees, Richard remembered that Julie
liked whipped cream on top of her hot coffee. He was
wondering if it was better to put the cream on now, or wait
till she arrived. “Since the cream is cold, it’ll cool down the
coffee faster,” he reasoned. Beep! It was a text message from
her. “I’ll be there in 5 minutes. Please put some cream on my
coffee.” He was startled, because she seemed to know
what he was thinking about. (d) Richard called over a
waiter wearing a blue shirt and asked him for whipped cream.
(D)
Richard thanked the waiter. Following his instructions,
Richard made a flower with the cream. He tried to be as
precise as he could. No sooner had he completed his
masterpiece, Julie stepped into the cafe. As she sat down, she
saw her coffee. “Wow, look at that! A white flower in the cup!
It looks so beautiful, Richard! It’s too lovely to drink,” his
friend said. “Try it,” (e) the happy man urged her. She tasted
it. “This coffee is absolutely delicious, too!” Talking and
laughing over coffee, they enjoyed the fabulous spring day.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Richard에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 어느 봄날 카페에서 길거리의 사람들을 바라보았다.
② 자신과 Julie를 위해 뜨거운 커피를 두 잔 주문했다.
③ 커피와 크림에 대해 웨이터와 대화를 나누었다.
④ 크림을 넣을지 알아보기 위해 Julie에게 문자를 보냈다.
⑤ Julie가 마실 커피 위에 꽃 모양을 만들었다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. Let’s do it this Friday.
② Sorry. I had to leave early yesterday.
③ No. The team meeting was canceled.
④ Thanks. We had a great time at the party.
⑤ Sure. We must hire him for our company.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Instead, you need to learn sign language.
② Actually, I didn’t read that news article.
③ Well, let’s plan a field trip with them.
④ Yeah, we had enough parking spaces.
⑤ Then, I’ll get him to sign your book.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 우체국 이전을 안내하려고
② 동호회 가입을 권유하려고
③ 여행 상품 정보를 제공하려고
④ 이사 업체 직원을 모집하려고
⑤ 동영상 제작 방법을 설명하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 대기 오염의 원인
② 기차 여행의 장점
③ 교통 체증의 심각성
④ 휴가 계획의 필요성
⑤ 안전 운전의 중요성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 초청 강사 － 행사 진행자
② 호텔 투숙객 － 호텔 직원
③ 보험 가입 고객 － 보험 설계사
④ 봉사 활동 희망자 － 도서관 직원
⑤ 도서 박람회 관람객 － 신문 기자
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장소 정하기 ② 의자 나르기
③ 재료 구매하기 ④ 메뉴 결정하기
⑤ 전단 복사하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 Ben Tyler 콘서트에 갈 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 부모님과 저녁 식사를 해야 해서
② 가족 파티를 준비해야 해서
③ 팀 프로젝트를 끝내야 해서
④ 수업을 들으러 가야 해서
⑤ 동생을 돌봐야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $54 ② $63 ③ $70
④ $81 ⑤ $90
10. 대화를 듣고, Eugene Kim에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 출생지 ② 수상작 제목 ③ 집필한 책의 수
④ 집필 장소 ⑤ 나이
11. Science Quiz Olympics에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 매년 열리는 행사이다.
② 9월 23일 금요일에 개최된다.
③ 모든 참가자는 티셔츠를 받는다.
④ 참가하려면 신청서를 작성해야 한다.
⑤ 행사 당일에 참가 신청이 가능하다.
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 세발자전거를
고르시오.
Kids’ Tricycles for Sale
Model Frame Warranty Helmet
Included Price
① A Plastic 1 year × $65
② B Steel 1 year ○ $75
③ C Steel 2 years × $75
④ D Steel 3 years × $85
⑤ E Aluminum 3 years ○ $105
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Of course, it is. It’ll be good for your future career.
② Certainly. You’re scheduled to meet my assistant.
③ I don’t think so. You can’t use the center for free.
④ No way. You don’t want to work with children.
⑤ Yes. It’s necessary to quit my part-time job.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Sorry. I don’t have the same interests as you.
② Thank you. It’ll help me make new friends.
③ Absolutely. I’ll give you some advice.
④ No thanks. I don’t like to play sports.
⑤ Well done. It was a wonderful game.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jenny가 Daniel에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Jenny:
① Why don’t you move to the dormitory?
② You’d better find a quiet place to study.
③ You should major in computer engineering.
④ How about taking a summer course together?
⑤ You need to follow the rules in the dormitory.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① benefits of cooking at home
② lives of great chefs in history
③ tips for cooking with leftover food
④ children’s snacks made from grains
⑤ food products invented accidentally
17. 언급된 음식이 아닌 것은?
① corn flakes ② potato chips ③ ice cream cones
④ onion rings ⑤ chocolate chip cookies
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Organizer,
My name is Cathy Cameron. I’m writing in regards
to the “Boston Red Sox Baseball Trip” for the game
with the Yankees taking place on Saturday, September
3rd. Unfortunately, I have just become aware that your
company’s limit of 53 people for registration has already
been reached. However, I would really appreciate it if you
could allow my son to register additionally. He is a big fan
of the Red Sox, and this trip would make a great surprise gift
for his birthday. If there is any way that he is able to join the
trip, I would be very grateful. I’m sure it would give him the
perfect birthday. I look forward to hearing from you soon.
Yours sincerely,
Cathy Cameron
① 야구와 관련된 새로운 사업을 제안하려고
② 야구 경기 관람권 구매 대행을 요청하려고
③ 아들 생일 파티를 위한 장소 예약을 취소하려고
④ 주말 가족 여행 일정 변경이 가능한지 문의하려고
⑤ 야구 경기 관람 여행에 아들의 추가 등록을 부탁하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘Amy’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Amy was in the classroom staring out of the window
beside her. She thought how her gloomy face in the window
reflected her mistake. She tried not to think about her terrible
performance in class. Watching Amy look so discouraged,
Laurie, her best friend, decided she needed some cheering up.
So Laurie crossed her eyes and made a stupid face. Amy tried
not to look, but Laurie was making another funny face. This
time she couldn’t help turning back to see what her friend was
doing. It was her famous fish face: she was pushing her ears
out, crossing her eyes, and opening her mouth wide. Amy
laughed hard. She felt that she was lucky to have a friend that
could always cheer her up when she was feeling down.
① relaxed → frustrated ② satisfied → ashamed
③ bored → exhausted ④ excited → frightened
⑤ depressed → comforted
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
My barely-five-year-old son couldn’t go to bed one night until
he wrote “I love you Mom” on a piece of paper. Pajamas on, red
crayon in hand, he was very determined. A few mixed-up letters,
a couple of crumpled papers, and some help from Daddy later,
he handed me his heart on the page. Then, finally, he relaxed
enough to fall asleep. Sometimes, saying how you feel just isn’t
enough. Spoken words are invisible and untouchable. Write
it down, however, and you can see it, feel it, hold it, keep it
forever. Although we may think it, we can’t really give someone
our heart. But by writing, we can give someone our heart on a
page. A love note is a piece of paper that is a little piece of your
heart. Teach your child how to write love notes, and I promise
you will have many, many happy returns.
* crumpled: 구겨진
① 자녀의 활동에 동참하여 유대감을 강화하라.
② 자녀가 글을 통해 마음을 표현하도록 가르치라.
③ 자녀가 부모의 사랑을 느낄 수 있도록 행동하라.
④ 자녀에게 대화를 통해 자연스럽게 감정을 표현하라.
⑤ 자녀의 인지 능력 향상을 위해 글쓰기 교육을 하라.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One of the most demanding, and at the same time inspiring,
aspects of translating for children is the potential for such
creativity that arises from what Peter Hollindale has called the
‘childness’ of children’s texts: ‘the quality of being a child ―
dynamic, imaginative, experimental, interactive and unstable’.
The ‘unstable’ qualities of childhood that Hollindale cites
require a writer or translator to have an understanding of the
freshness of language to the child’s eye and ear, the child’s
affective concerns and the linguistic and dramatic play of
early childhood. Translating sound, for example, whether in
the read-aloud qualities of books for the younger child, in
animal noises, children’s poetry or in nonsense rhymes,
demands imaginative solutions ― as indeed does working with
visual material. Such multi-faceted creativity has, at times,
placed children’s literature at the forefront of imaginative
experimentation.
* multi-faceted: 다면의
① 아동문학 번역에서는 아동의 특성에 기반을 둔 창의성이 요구된다.
② 아동문학 속 다양한 의성어는 아동의 창의성 발달에 도움이 된다.
③ 아동문학 번역가는 아동의 태도를 긍정적으로 변화시키는 데 기여한다.
④ 아동문학가는 아동의 성장 과정을 구체적으로 표현할 수 있어야 한다.
⑤ 아동문학은 아동 언어 발달에 도움이 되는 다양한 요소들을 담고 있다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
From an evolutionary perspective, fear has contributed to
both fostering and limiting change, and to preserving the
species. We are programmed to be afraid. It is a survival need,
as is stability, which is another force of nature that can limit
the capacity to change. Stable patterns are necessary lest we
live in chaos; however, they make it difficult to abandon
entrenched behaviors, even those that are no longer useful,
constructive, or health creating. And fear can keep you from
changing when you don’t want to risk a step into unknown
territory; for example, some people choose not to leave an
unfulfilling job or a failing relationship because they fear the
unknown more than the known. On the other hand, fear can
also motivate change in order to avoid something you’re afraid
of, such as dying young ― as one of your parents might have.
* entrenched: 굳어버린
① fear’s negative roles in cases of chaos
② effective strategies for maintaining stability
③ fear and its dual functions in terms of change
④ the necessities of reducing a fear of the unknown
⑤ ways of confronting fear to overcome difficulties in life
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
A strategic vision has little value to the organization unless
it’s effectively communicated down the line to lower-level
managers and employees. It would be difficult for a vision
statement to provide direction to decision makers and energize
employees toward achieving long-term strategic intent unless
they know of the vision and observe management’s commitment
to that vision. Communicating the vision to organization
members nearly always means putting “where we are going and
why” in writing, distributing the statement organizationwide,
and having executives personally explain the vision and its
justification to as many people as possible. Ideally, executives
should present their vision for the company in a manner that
reaches out and grabs people’s attention. An engaging and
convincing strategic vision has enormous motivational value ―
for the same reason that a stone mason is inspired by building
a great cathedral for the ages.
* stone mason: 석공 ** cathedral: 대성당
① What Makes a Strategic Vision Successful?
② Why Is Creating a Vision Statement Difficult?
③ Building a Future: Innovative Leadership Training
④ Effective Decision-Making Processes in Organizations
⑤ Motivating Employees through Organizational Development
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentage of Americans in
different age groups who said it was “generally OK” to use a
cellphone in different settings in 2014. ① In the setting of “On
public transportation,” the younger groups are more accepting
than the older ones regarding cellphone use. ② “When walking
down the street” is the setting in which people aged 30-49 are
more permissive towards cellphone use than the other age
groups. ③ As for “At restaurants,” 50% of the 18-29 year olds
answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones while 26% of those
65 and older say the same. ④ Only 4% of people in each of the
two age groups, 30-49 and 50-64, agree that cellphone use is
acceptable in the setting of “At movie theaters or other quiet
places.” ⑤ In the same setting, less than 10% of people in each
age group answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. !Kung San에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The !Kung San, also known as the Bushmen, live in the
Kalahari Desert in southern Africa. The “!K” in the name
“!Kung” is like the sound that occurs when a cork is pulled
from a bottle. Traditionally, they lived by hunting and
gathering, the way of life that was the universal mode of
human existence until 10,000 years ago. The total population
of the !Kung San in 1986 was about 15,000, with most of
them living in nonhunting and gathering situations on
cattleposts or farms. The !Kung San in the Dobe area of
Botswana were divided into twenty five groups with a mean
size of eighteen to twenty people. The !Kung San in that area
had abundant food supply and a lot of leisure time. The main
food crop was the wild mongongo nut, millions of which were
harvested every year.
① 남부 아프리카 Kalahari 사막에 산다.
② 이름 속 “!K”는 병에서 코르크 마개를 뽑을 때 나는 소리와 유사하다.
③ 1986년에 전체 인구가 약 15,000명이었다.
④ Botswana의 Dobe 지역에서는 25개의 그룹으로 나뉘어 있었다.
⑤ Dobe 지역에서 식량은 부족했지만 여가 시간은 많았다.
26. 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 스포츠센터 개장일은 11월 30일이다.
② 응모작 제출은 웹사이트에서 진행된다.
③ 최상위 응모작 세 개가 온라인 투표 대상이 된다.
④ 투표는 두 달 동안 웹사이트에서 진행된다.
⑤ 우승 상품은 스포츠센터 1년 회원권이다.
27. Fashion Career Discovery Day에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
① 전문 디자이너들과의 인터뷰는 포함되어 있지 않다.
② 11월 5일부터 이틀간 진행된다.
③ 티켓 가격에 점심과 기념품이 포함된다.
④ 10명부터 단체 할인이 적용된다.
⑤ 예약하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
Like life in traditional society, but unlike other team sports,
baseball is not governed by the clock. A football game is
comprised of exactly sixty minutes of play, a basketball game
forty or forty-eight minutes, but baseball has no set length of time
within which the game must be completed. The pace of the game
is therefore leisurely and (A) unhurried / unhurriedly, like the
world before the discipline of measured time, deadlines,
schedules, and wages paid by the hour. Baseball belongs to the
kind of world (B) which / in which people did not say, “I haven’t
got all day.” Baseball games do have all day to be played. But that
does not mean that they can go on forever. Baseball, like
traditional life, proceeds according to the rhythm of nature,
specifically the rotation of the Earth. During its first half century,
games were not played at night, which meant that baseball games,
like the traditional work day, (C) ending / ended when the sun set.
(A) (B) (C)
① unhurried …… in which …… ended
② unhurried …… which …… ending
③ unhurriedly …… which …… ended
④ unhurriedly …… which …… ending
⑤ unhurriedly …… in which …… ended
Name Our Sports Center!
The grand opening of our brand-new sports
center is on November 30th, but we still don’t
have a name! Please take this opportunity to be part of
Watford Community history, and help us name it!
Entry Submission
∙September 1st—30th on our website (www.watfordcc.org)
The three best entries will be selected by the Watford
volunteer group and will be made available online for
voting to decide the winner.
Vote
∙October 15th—31st on our website
Winner Announcement
∙November 3rd on our website
∙Prize: a one-year sports center membership
We’re looking for the most dynamic and fun names,
so get your entries in now!
Watford Community Council
Fashion Career Discovery Day
Experience our Fashion Career Discovery Day and unlock
pathways to a fulfilling career in fashion! Your day will
include interviews with professional designers, as well as the
opportunity to watch a fashion show.
Date: Saturday, November 5, 2016
Time: 10 a.m.—4 p.m.
Location: Pavilion Fashion Plaza
716 East Livera Street
Ticket Price: $20 per person (lunch and souvenir included)
A minimum of 15 participants is necessary for group
bookings to receive a 10% discount.
Reservations are required and must be made on our website
(www.pfp2016.org) by 6 p.m., Thursday, November 3, 2016.
Please email us at fashioncdd@pfp2016.org for further
information.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
You can’t have a democracy if you can’t talk with your
neighbors about matters of mutual interest or concern. Thomas
Jefferson, who had an enduring interest in democracy, came
to a similar conclusion. He was prescient in understanding
the dangers of (A) concentrated / limited power, whether in
corporations or in political leaders or exclusionary political
institutions. Direct involvement of citizens was what had made
the American Revolution possible and given the new republic
vitality and hope for the future. Without that involvement, the
republic would die. Eventually, he saw a need for the nation to
be (B) blended / subdivided into “wards” ― political units so
small that everyone living there could participate directly in
the political process. The representatives for each ward in the
capital would have to be (C) resistant / responsive to citizens
organized in this way. A vibrant democracy conducted locally
would then provide the active basic unit for the democratic life
of the republic. With that kind of involvement, the republic might
survive and prosper.
* prescient: 선견지명이 있는 ** vibrant: 활력이 넘치는
(A) (B) (C)
① concentrated …… blended …… resistant
② concentrated …… subdivided …… responsive
③ concentrated …… subdivided …… resistant
④ limited …… subdivided …… resistant
⑤ limited …… blended …… responsive
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Harumi Tanaka, from Osaka, Japan, had accepted an
assignment in Boston. His task was to explore the possibility
of developing joint ventures with American firms. ① He had
been invited by one company to spend a month there and
had been assigned an office and a research assistant. Harumi
agreed on a Monday to present a business plan the following
Friday. On Tuesday, the computers in the company crashed,
and the research assistant called in sick with a severe case of
the flu. Still, Harumi pushed forward and presented ② his
plan on Friday. He began his presentation, “I’m sorry that
③ I am not well prepared. This meeting may not be a good
use of your time.” He then went into a clear, interesting
presentation. After the meeting, one of the American executives
said, “④ I don’t know why you had to apologize. Everyone
knows about the computer crash and your assistant’s illness.”
Harumi responded that he thought that the apology would be
a good introduction to ⑤ his presentation.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. A sleeping mother has the ability to identify the particular
cry of her own baby. This is one of the bonding factors that
has been forgotten because of the way in which we live today.
Typically, there is now only one newborn baby in any family
house or apartment, so there is no way to test this ability. In
an ancient tribe, however, living in small huts in a tiny village
settlement, a mother would have been able to hear any of the
babies crying in the night. If she woke up every time one of
them screamed for food, she might get no sleep at all. During
the course of evolution she became programmed to awake
only at the sound of her own particular baby. This
is still there to this day, even though it is seldom used. [3점]
① affection ② creativity ③ sociability
④ intolerance ⑤ sensitivity
32. When people try to control situations that are essentially
uncontrollable, they are inclined to experience high levels of
stress. Thus, suggesting that they need to take active control is
bad advice in those situations. What they need to do is to accept
that some things are beyond their control. Similarly, teaching
people to accept a situation that could readily be changed could
be bad advice; sometimes the only way to get what you want is
to take active control. Research has shown that when people who
feel helpless fail to take control, they experience negative
emotional states such as anxiety and depression. Like stress,
these negative emotions can damage the immune response. We
can see from this that health is not linearly related to control. For
optimum health, people should be encouraged to take control to
a point . [3점]
① but to yield to the situations within their control
② but to disregard immune response when stressed
③ but to recognize when further control is impossible
④ and to fight against uncontrollable situations persistently
⑤ and to try harder to conquer uncontrollable stressful situations
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. A good deal of the information stored in working memory is
encoded in an auditory form, especially when the information is
language based. For example, in an early study by Conrad, adults
were shown six-letter sequences, with letters being presented
visually, one at a time, at intervals of three-fourths of a second.
As soon as the last letter of a sequence had been presented,
participants in the study wrote down all six of the letters they had
seen, guessing at any letters they couldn’t easily recall. When
people recalled letters incorrectly, the letters they said they had
seen were more likely to resemble the actual stimuli in terms
of .
For example, the letter F was “remembered” as the auditorially
similar letter S 131 times but as the visually similar letter P only
14 times. Similarly, the letter V was remembered as B 56 times
but as X only 5 times. [3점]
① how the letters were visually represented
② how the letters sounded than how they looked
③ how the length of the letter sequence was recognized
④ how the letters were ordered than how they were pronounced
⑤ how often the letters appeared than how long they were shown
34. Even if it is correct to say that we express and represent
our thoughts in language, it may be a big mistake to suppose
that there are structural similarities between what is doing the
representing and what is represented. Robert Stalnaker, in his
book Inquiry, suggests an analogy with the representation of
numbers: The number 9 can be represented as ‘12—3’ but it
does not follow that 12, 3, or subtraction are constituents of
the number 9. We could compare a thought and its verbal
expression with toothpaste and its ‘expression’ from a tube.
That the result of expressing toothpaste is a long, thin,
cylinder does not entail that toothpaste itself is long, thin, or
cylindrical. Similarly, a thought might get expressed out loud
in a statement with a particular linguistic structure. It does not
follow that .
Suppose, for example, that I look at a fruit bowl, and think
that there is an apple and an orange in that bowl. The objects
in front of my eyes include some pieces of fruit and a bowl,
but no object corresponding to the word ‘and’ exists either in
the world or in my visual image. [3점]
* subtraction: 빼기 ** entail: 의미(함의)하다
① the thought itself has such a structure
② linguistic analysis of a thought is unlikely
③ the language in mind lacks a logical structure
④ a thought and its verbal expression are distinct
⑤ the sentence structurally differs from the thought
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
The pull effect of a destination can be positively influenced
by the introduction and reinforcement of pro-tourism policies
that make a destination more accessible. ① Governments, for
example, can and often do employ awareness campaigns
among the resident population to promote a welcoming attitude
towards visitors, in order to foster a positive market image.
② However, because such campaigns depend on widespread
social engineering, and because their effects can be
counteracted by random acts of violence, positive outcomes
cannot be guaranteed. ③ Most governments in developing
countries encourage international tourism because tourists
from wealthy countries usually spend more. ④ Furthermore,
it is the behaviour of some tourists, and the structure and
development of tourism itself, that often generate negative
attitudes within the host community. ⑤ This implies that major
structural changes to tourism itself, rather than awareness
campaigns, may be required to foster a welcoming attitude.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Psychologists Dember and Earl suggested that the
motivation for exploration had its roots in a curiosity drive.
(A) This is very important for understanding why people will
often return to explore things that they explored before or
do things they have done before. In our daily lives, for
example, we might decide to listen to a piece of music that
we have listened to many times.
(B) By returning to that music with a new or fresh perspective,
perhaps as a result of listening to other music, we find
something new and interesting. One reason that people can
play a card game such as bridge over and over is that no
matter how many times you have played the game, it will be
different in some way.
(C) They suggested that curiosity is stimulated by novelty and
argued that novelty is in the eye of the beholder. We
could have seen something many times before, but as the
result of having new skills or competence, we discover
new or different aspects of that object.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
The hunters, armed only with primitive weapons, were
no real match for an angry mammoth. Many were probably
killed or severely injured in the close encounters that were
necessary to slay one of these gigantic animals.
(A) Some of them may have traveled by small boat along the
coast, but many walked. Twenty thousand years ago, at the
height of the last glacial period, sea level was so low that
dry land joined what are now separate continents.
(B) But the rewards were great when one was brought down.
A single mammoth could feed, clothe, and supply a band
for a long time. The hunters had followed the mammoths
and other large animals eastward from Asia across what is
now the Bering Sea.
(C) Slowly, imperceptibly, and probably unconsciously, hunters
had moved across the land bridge and become the first
immigrants to the new land. Without the ice age, North
America might have remained unpopulated for thousands
of years more.
* slay: 죽이다
① (A) — (C) — (B) ② (B) — (A) — (C)
③ (B) — (C) — (A) ④ (C) — (A) — (B)
⑤ (C) — (B) — (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Even so, research confirms the finding that nonverbal cues
are more credible than verbal cues, especially when verbal
and nonverbal cues conflict.
Researchers have reported various nonverbal features of
sarcasm. ( ① ) Most disagree as to whether nonverbal cues
are essential to the perception of sarcasm or the emotion that
prompts it. ( ② ) Also, nonverbal cues are better indicators
of speaker intent. ( ③ ) As the nature of sarcasm implies a
contradiction between intent and message, nonverbal cues
may “leak” and reveal the speaker’s true mood as they do
in deception. ( ④ ) Ostensibly, sarcasm is the opposite of
deception in that a sarcastic speaker typically intends the
receiver to recognize the sarcastic intent; whereas, in deception
the speaker typically intends that the receiver not recognize
the deceptive intent. ( ⑤ ) Thus, when communicators are
attempting to determine if a speaker is sarcastic, they compare
the verbal and nonverbal message and if the two are in
opposition, communicators may conclude that the speaker is
being sarcastic.
* sarcasm: 비꼼 ** ostensibly: 표면상
39.
This dynamic can be illustrated with the example of
parents who place equal value on convenience and concern
for the environment.
Our total set of values and their relative importance to us
constitute our value system. ( ① ) The way that we behave in
a given situation is often influenced by how important one
value is to us relative to others. ( ② ) For instance, deciding
whether to spend Saturday afternoon relaxing with your family
or exercising will be determined by the relative importance
that you place on family versus health. ( ③ ) You feel value
conflict when you do something that is consistent with one
value but inconsistent with another equally important value.
( ④ ) They may experience value conflict if they buy
disposable diapers for their babies. ( ⑤ ) Consumers facing
such decisions consider not only the product’s immediate
consumption outcomes but also the product’s general effect
on society, including how the manufacturer behaves (e.g.,
toward the environment).
* diaper: 기저귀
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
In science one experiment, whether it succeeds or fails, is
logically followed by another in a theoretically infinite
progression. According to the underlying myth of modern
science, this progression is always replacing the smaller
knowledge of the past with the larger knowledge of the
present, which will be replaced by the yet larger knowledge
of the future. In the arts, by contrast, no limitless sequence of
works is ever implied or looked for. No work of art is
necessarily followed by a second work that is necessarily
better. Given the methodologies of science, the law of gravity
and the genome were bound to be discovered by somebody;
the identity of the discoverer is incidental to the fact. But it
appears that in the arts there are no second chances. We must
assume that we had one chance each for The Divine Comedy
and King Lear. If Dante and Shakespeare had died before
they wrote those works, nobody ever would have written them.
󰀻
While scientific knowledge is believed to progress through
(A) experiments, an artistic work tends to be
(B) to its creator with no limitless sequence implied.
(A) (B)
① successive …… unique
② successive …… valuable
③ controlled …… valuable
④ incidental …… influential
⑤ incidental …… unique
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Three composers attended a show at the Café Concert des
Ambassadeurs. There they heard performances of a song written
by one of them and a sketch written by the other two. After the
performance, the three refused to pay their bill, telling the owner
of the café: ‘You use the products of our labour without paying
us for it. So there’s no reason why we should pay for your
service’. The case went to court, and the composers won on
appeal. The decision extended an existing law on theatrical
performances to all musical works and all public performance
of those works. This decision created a new category of legal
right ― the performing right ― and with it a new economic
relationship between music user and copyright owner.
As a result of the decision, these composers and others
including music publishers founded a society to enforce and
administer their performing rights. In doing so, they
established the principle and practice of the collective
administration of rights, based on the fact that ― with the
possible exception of opera performances ― it was
impossible for a single composer or publisher to monitor
every use of his or her work by singers, bands, promoters or,
in the twentieth century, broadcasters. , the new
society was entrusted with the task of monitoring music use,
issuing licences to music users, negotiating fees, collecting
fees and finally distributing the money raised to the
composers and songwriters whose works were adding value
to other people’s businesses.
41. 윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the cultural significance of musical performance
② strategies for creating public interest through music
③ the rise of performing rights in music and its effects
④ performing arts for the public and their artistic value
⑤ the influence of the new society on increasing licence fees
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Accordingly ② Nevertheless ③ Otherwise
④ Conversely ⑤ Similarly
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
What interested me the most about the new house was the
stable in the backyard, in which my father let me make a
small space for a pony. I believed that it meant that I would
get a pony for Christmas. (a) He also said, “Lennie, someday
you’ll have a pony of your own.” However, “some day” is a
pain to a boy who lives in and knows only “now.”
Meanwhile my father took me to a pony fair and let me try
some ponies, but (b) he always found some fault with them,
leaving me in despair. When Christmas was at hand, I had
abandoned all hope of getting one. Instead, I hung up the
biggest stocking I had. Waking up at 7 a.m., my little sisters
and I raced for the fireplace downstairs. While my sisters
were delighted to find their stockings filled with presents,
mine was empty. I went out into the yard and wept all by
myself.
After an hour, my frustration reached its climax, when I saw
a man riding a pony with a brand-new saddle. When he looked
at our door, he just passed by, which caused me to break into a
flood of tears. Then, he said, “Kid, do you know a boy named
Lennie Steffens?” “That’s me,” I replied in tears. He said,
“I’ve been looking all over for your house. Why don’t you put
your house number where it can be seen?” He went on saying,
“I should have been here at 7. Your father told me to bring the
pony here and leave (c) him for you.”
I’d never seen anything so beautiful as my pony. And finally,
I rode off into the fields. Thrilled by riding, I began to feast my
eyes on the world around me. The trees seemed to be taking on
smiling faces and the birds seemed to be singing to congratulate
me on getting my new friend. When I returned home, my father
asked, “Why did you come back so soon?” With a smile on my
face, I answered (d) him, “I didn’t want to make him feel tired.
It’s his first day with me.” (e) He laughed and wiped away the
tear stains from my face ― his heartfelt gesture of apology for
such a long-delayed present. Bursting with happiness, I spent
the rest of the day brushing my pony in the stable.
* stable: 마구간
43. 윗글의 마지막 단락에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
① witty and humorous ② joyful and heartwarming
③ gloomy and hopeless ④ mysterious and adventurous
⑤ desperate and discouraging
44. 밑줄 친 (a) ～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 아버지는 Lennie에게 조랑말을 위한 공간을 마련하도록 하였다.
② 아버지는 Lennie를 조랑말 시장에 데리고 갔다.
③ Lennie의 여동생들은 크리스마스 선물을 받지 못했다.
④ Lennie는 조랑말을 예정보다 늦게 받았다.
⑤ Lennie는 마구간에서 조랑말을 솔질해 주었다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1
8
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes. That would be great.
② Sure. We had a great time.
③ Right. I already got a job.
④ Never. They haven’t seen it.
⑤ No. There’s no writing class.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I agree. But I don’t have the time for it.
② You’re right. Then I’ll never tell anyone.
③ Trust me. You’ll realize you did the right thing.
④ I understand. But let us know if it happens again.
⑤ That’s true. We’ve been practicing for a long time.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 농장 체험 프로그램을 홍보하려고
② 유산소 운동의 장점을 소개하려고
③ 가족 여행 준비물을 안내하려고
④ 유제품 보관 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 저지방 식단의 중요성을 강조하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 효과적인 독서를 위해서 집중력을 길러야 한다.
② 학습자의 수준에 맞는 영어 도서를 선택해야 한다.
③ 도전 욕구를 불러일으키는 과제는 학습 동기를 높인다.
④ 학습자의 흥미를 고려한 영어 읽기 자료를 개발해야 한다.
⑤ 사전을 활용한 어휘 학습은 영어 읽기 능력 향상에 도움이 된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 사회자 － 마술사 ② 조련사 － 관람객
③ 무대감독 － 가수 ④ 운전기사 － 정비사
⑤ 은행원 － 고객
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 공연 연습 도와주기
② 생일 케이크 만들기
③ 카메라 가방 구매하기
④ 여분의 메모리 카드 찾기
⑤ 아이의 무대의상 가져오기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 하이킹을 할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 휴대전화를 수리해야 해서
② 할머니를 찾아뵈어야 해서
③ 회사 회의에 참석해야 해서
④ 신상품 광고를 준비해야 해서
⑤ 친구들과 영화를 보러 가야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36 ② $40 ③ $45 ④ $47 ⑤ $50
10. 대화를 듣고, World Furniture Expo에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 개최 기간 ② 개최 장소 ③ 참여 업체 수
④ 특별 강좌 ⑤ 입장료
11. Creative Minds Science Club에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 1학년과 2학년 학생이 가입할 수 있다.
② 매주 화요일 방과 후에 모인다.
③ 작년에 다수의 발명 대회에서 수상하였다.
④ 올해의 지도 교사는 물리 선생님이다.
⑤ 더 많은 정보를 학교 게시판에서 찾을 수 있다.
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지 1
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 램프를 고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Probably not. You’d better see a doctor.
② It’s my fault. I should’ve told you earlier.
③ That’s too bad. We waited for you today.
④ No problem. I can explain how to get there.
⑤ That’s right. We met in the library yesterday.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① That’s a good idea. I’ll get rid of it right away.
② I think it’s closed. Turn in the book tomorrow.
③ I hope you’re right. I’ll check with them.
④ It’s too late. The tickets are all sold out.
⑤ Here’s the wallet. Take it to the station.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Brian이 Sarah에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Brian:
① You can take a singing class at the local community center.
② Try to keep a close relationship with your classmates.
③ Would you give me some advice as a mentor?
④ You need to get help with your recommendation letter.
⑤ How about volunteering as a mentor at the community center?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① several ways flowers attract animals
② popular professions related to animals
③ various animals that feed from flowers
④ major factors that pose a threat to animals
⑤ endangered animals living on tropical islands
17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① hummingbirds ② bats ③ lizards
④ parrots ⑤ squirrels
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 한국의 대학 생활과 관련한 유의 사항을 알리려고
② 한국어 글쓰기 강좌의 변경된 등록 절차를 공지하려고
③ 한국어 글쓰기 지도를 받을 외국인 학생을 모집하려고
④ 외국인 학생을 위한 글쓰기 센터 설립을 건의하려고
⑤ 한국어 글쓰기 지도 강사의 자격 요건을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Breaden의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
All smiling, Breaden, a cute three-year-old boy, was walking
along the aisle of snacks, bars, and sweets. It was the aisle of
all kinds of temptation for him. “Wow!” he exclaimed. Right in
front of his eyes were rows of delicious-looking chocolate bars
waiting to be touched. His mom was holding his hand.
Breaden, her only child, had always been the focus of her
attention and she was cautious not to lose him in the market.
Suddenly, she stopped to say hello to her friends. Breaden
stopped, too. With his eyes wide open and his mouth watering,
Breaden stretched out his arm and was about to grab a bar
when he felt a tight grip on his hand. He looked up. “Breaden,
not today!” He knew what that meant. “Okay, Mommy,” he
sighed. His shoulders fell.
① excited → disappointed ② embarrassed → satisfied
③ lonely → pleased ④ annoyed → relieved
⑤ delighted → jealous
20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many present efforts to guard and maintain human
progress, to meet human needs, and to realize human
ambitions are simply unsustainable ─ in both the rich and
poor nations. They draw too heavily, too quickly, on already
overdrawn environmental resource accounts to be affordable
far into the future without bankrupting those accounts. They
may show profit on the balance sheets of our generation, but
our children will inherit the losses. We borrow environmental
capital from future generations with no intention or prospect
of repaying. They may blame us for our wasteful ways, but
they can never collect on our debt to them. We act as we do
because we can get away with it: future generations do not
vote; they have no political or financial power; they cannot
challenge our decisions.
① 환경 문제를 해결하기 위한 세대 간 협력이 중요하다.
② 인류의 발전은 다양한 환경 자원의 개발에 달려 있다.
③ 미래의 환경 문제에 대비한 국제 사회의 공조가 필요하다.
④ 선진국들은 경제력을 기반으로 환경 자원을 선점하고 있다.
⑤ 현세대는 미래 세대에 대한 고려 없이 환경 자원을 남용하고 있다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Want to improve your Korean writing? Writing is an
essential tool that will help you adjust to Korean
university life. The Ha-Rang Writing Center offers a
free tutoring program open to all international students
at our university. We encourage you to take advantage
of this. The program has always been very popular
among international students. Registration opens from
November 28 for three days only. Once you are
registered, we will match you with a perfect tutor and
contact you to arrange your schedule. We are sure that
you will be satisfied with our well-experienced tutors.
Don’t miss this great opportunity to improve your
Korean writing. For more information, feel free to email
Jiyung Yoon, HRWC Director, at jyoon@hrwc.org.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
The precision of the lines on the map, the consistency with
which symbols are used, the grid and/or projection system, the
apparent certainty with which place names are written and
placed, and the legend and scale information all give the map
an aura of scientific accuracy and objectivity. Although
subjective interpretation goes into the construction of these
cartographic elements, the finished map appears to express an
authoritative truth about the world, separate from any interests
and influences. The very trust that this apparent objectivity
inspires is what makes maps such powerful carriers of ideology.
However unnoticeably, maps do indeed reflect the world views
of either their makers or, more probably, the supporters of their
makers, in addition to the political and social conditions under
which they were made. Some of the simple ideological
messages that maps can convey include: This land is and has
long been ours; here is the center of the universe; if we do not
claim this land, the enemies you most fear will.
* aura: 기운, 분위기 ** cartographic : 지도 제작(법)의
① the authority derived from trustworthy maps
② political and social conflicts caused by maps
③ ideologies lying beneath the objectivity of maps
④ the conditions essential to making a map accurate
⑤ subjectivity defining the creativity of map-making
[22～23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. As a system for transmitting specific factual information
without any distortion or ambiguity, the sign system of
honey-bees would probably win easily over human language
every time. However, language offers something more
valuable than mere information exchange. Because the
meanings of words are not invariable and because
understanding always involves interpretation, the act of
communicating is always a joint, creative effort. Words can
carry meanings beyond those consciously intended by
speakers or writers because listeners or readers bring their own
perspectives to the language they encounter. Ideas expressed
imprecisely may be more intellectually stimulating for
listeners or readers than simple facts. The fact that language is
not always reliable for causing precise meanings to be generated
in someone else’s mind is a reflection of its powerful strength
as a medium for creating new understanding. It is the inherent
ambiguity and adaptability of language as a meaning-making
system that makes the relationship between language and
thinking so special.
* distortion: 왜곡, 곡해
① Erase Ambiguity in Language Production!
② Not Creative but Simple: The Way Language Works
③ Communication as a Universal Goal in Language Use
④ What in Language Creates Varied Understanding?
⑤ Language: A Crystal-Clear Looking Glass
23. The film director, as compared to the theater director, has
as his material, the finished, recorded celluloid. This material
from which his final work is composed consists not of living
men or real landscapes, not of real, actual stage-sets, but only
of their images, recorded on separate strips that can be
shortened, altered, and assembled according to his will. The
elements of reality are fixed on these pieces; by combining
them in his selected sequence, shortening and lengthening
them according to his desire, the director builds up his own
“filmic” time and “filmic” space. He does not adapt reality,
but uses it for the creation of a new reality, and the most
characteristic and important aspect of this process is that, in it,
laws of space and time invariable and inescapable in work
with actuality become obedient. The film assembles from
them a new reality proper only to itself.
① A Reality in the Film Director’s Hands
② The Director’s Reality Never Changes
③ Innovative Technology in Film Editing
④ A Filmic World: Lost in Time and Space
⑤ Film Making: Exploration into the Unknown
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The two pie charts above show how much of the
information found using search engines is considered to be
accurate or trustworthy by two groups of respondents (AP &
NWP teachers and U.S. adult search users) in 2012. ① As for
AP & NWP teachers, five percent say that “All / Almost all”
of the information found using search engines is accurate or
trustworthy, while 28 percent of U.S. adult search users say
the same. ② The largest percentage of both AP & NWP
teachers and U.S. adult search users answer that “Most” of
the information is accurate or trustworthy. ③ In addition, 40
percent of AP & NWP teachers say that “Some” of the
information is accurate or trustworthy, and more than 30
percent of U.S. adult search users respond the same. ④ U.S.
adult search users saying that “Very little / None” of the
information found using search engines is accurate or
trustworthy account for less than five percent. ⑤ The
percentage of U.S. adult search users who answer “Don’t
know” is only one percent.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4
8
25. Miloš Forman에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Even though he won many Academy Awards, Miloš
Forman was not a U.S. born filmmaker. Forman grew up in a
small town near Prague. Orphaned when his parents died
during World War II, he was raised by his relatives. In the
1950s, Forman studied film at the film school of the
University of Prague. Throughout the late 1950s and early
1960s, Forman acted as either writer or assistant director on
several films. Later, he emigrated to the U.S. and continued to
make films. In 1975, he directed One Flew over the Cuckoo’s
Nest, which became only the second film in history to win
Oscars in all the five major categories. Afterward, the movie
Amadeus, a celebration of the genius of Mozart, which he
also directed, swept eight Oscars including one for best
director. With Jan Novák, Forman wrote his autobiography,
Turnaround: A Memoir, which was published in 1994.
① Prague 근교의 작은 마을에서 성장했다.
② Prague 대학교에서 영화를 공부했다.
③ 미국으로 이주한 후에도 계속 영화를 만들었다.
④ 영화 Amadeus로 오스카 최고 감독상을 수상했다.
⑤ Turnaround: A Memoir를 단독으로 집필했다.
26. Fremont Art College’s 7th Annual Art Exhibition에 관한
다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 개장 시간은 주중과 주말이 다르다.
② 학생들이 출품한 사진이 전시될 예정이다.
③ 모든 전시품은 판매되지 않는다.
④ 전시회장 내에서 사진 촬영이 허용된다.
⑤ 카페테리아에서 간식이 무료로 제공될 것이다.
27. Fall Festival at Forest Botanic Gardens에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 아침 산책은 비가 내려도 진행된다.
② 연날리기와 모래성 쌓기는 무료이다.
③ 잔디밭에 앉는 것이 허용된다.
④ 헤드폰 없이 오디오 장치를 사용할 수 있다.
⑤ 주차 요금은 무료이다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
When people face real adversity ─ disease, unemployment,
or the disabilities of age ─ affection from a pet takes on new
meaning. A pet’s continuing affection becomes crucially
important for ① those enduring hardship because it reassures
them that their core essence has not been damaged. Thus pets
are important in the treatment of ② depressed or chronically ill
patients. In addition, pets are ③ used to great advantage with
the institutionalized aged. In such institutions it is difficult for
the staff to retain optimism when all the patients are declining
in health. Children who visit cannot help but remember
④ what their parents or grandparents once were and be
depressed by their incapacities. Animals, however, have no
expectations about mental capacity. They do not worship
youth. They have no memories about what the aged once
⑤ was and greet them as if they were children. An old man
holding a puppy can relive a childhood moment with complete
accuracy. His joy and the animal’s response are the same.
Fremont Art Collegeʼs 7th Annual
ART EXHIBITION
November 21－27
3rd Floor Gallery in the Student Union
Hours: 10:00 a.m.－5:00 p.m. (Monday － Friday)
11:00 a.m.－3:00 p.m. (Saturday & Sunday)
∙Fremont Art College will be hosting its 7th Annual
Art Exhibition for one week.
∙Paintings, ceramic works, and photographs submitted
by students will be exhibited. All exhibits are for sale,
and all money raised will be donated to charity.
∙The exhibition is free to all.
∙Taking photos is allowed inside the exhibition hall.
∙Free snacks will be available at the cafeteria.
For more information, please visit our website at
www.fremontart.edu.
Fall Festival at Forest Botanic Gardens
October 1－October 31
◈ Morning Walk
－ The number of participants is limited to 20.
－ The walk will be cancelled in the event of rain.
◈ Fun Activities
－ Enjoy exciting activities such as kite flying and
sandcastle building for free.
－ Spend a day or two camping.
◈ Tips for Your Visit
－ Sitting on lawns is not permitted.
－ Audio devices may only be used with headphones.
◈ Parking
－ The parking lot is open from 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. every
day.
－ The parking fee is $10 a day.
◈ For more information, visit www.fffbg.com.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
When teachers work in isolation, they tend to see the world
through one set of eyes ─ their own. The fact that there might
be someone somewhere in the same building or district who
may be more successful at teaching this or that subject or
lesson is (A) based / lost on teachers who close the door and
work their way through the school calendar virtually alone. In
the absence of a process that (B) allows / forbids them to
benchmark those who do things better or at least differently,
teachers are left with that one perspective ─ their own. I
taught various subjects under the social studies umbrella and
had very little idea of how my peers who taught the same
subject did what they did. The idea of meeting regularly to
compare notes, plan common assessments, and share what we
did well (C) mostly / never occurred to us. Rather, we spent
much time in the social studies office complaining about a
lack of time and playing the blame game.
(A) (B) (C)
① based …… allows …… never
② based …… forbids …… mostly
③ lost …… allows …… mostly
④ lost …… allows …… never
⑤ lost …… forbids …… never
30. 밑줄 친 he[his]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Dr. Paul Odland and his friend Bob travel frequently to
South America, where they provide free medical treatment for
disabled children of poor families. One day, they went to a
local marketplace. Paul wanted to buy some souvenirs, and
① he spotted a carving that he liked. The non-English
speaking seller was asking 500 pesos for the carving. With Bob
acting as interpreter, Paul offered 300 and ② his opponent
proposed 450. The bargaining in the noisy market became
spirited, even intense, with Paul stepping up ③ his price
slightly and the seller going down slowly. The pace increased
so fast that Bob could not keep up with the back-and-forth
interpretation. Meanwhile, observing the seller carefully, Paul
sensed something wrong in Bob’s interpretation. In fact, the
seller had gone below Paul’s last offer. When Paul raised his
doubt, Bob instantly recognized the error and corrected ④ his
interpretation. At length, they settled the deal, and ⑤ he was
delighted to purchase the carving at a reasonable price and
thanked Bob.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The creativity that children possess needs to be cultivated
throughout their development. Research suggests that
overstructuring the child’s environment may actually limit
creative and academic development. This is a central problem
with much of science instruction. The exercises or activities
are devised to eliminate different options and to focus on
predetermined results. The answers are structured to fit the
course assessments, and the wonder of science is lost along
with cognitive intrigue. We define cognitive intrigue as the
wonder that stimulates and intrinsically motivates an
individual to voluntarily engage in an activity. The loss of
cognitive intrigue may be initiated by the sole use of play
items with predetermined conclusions and reinforced by rote
instruction in school. This is exemplified by toys, games, and
lessons that are a(n) in and of themselves and
require little of the individual other than to master the planned
objective. [3점]
* rote : 기계적인 암기
① end ② input ③ puzzle
④ interest ⑤ alternative
32. Temporal resolution is particularly interesting in the
context of satellite remote sensing. The temporal density of
remotely sensed imagery is large, impressive, and growing.
Satellites are collecting a great deal of imagery as you read
this sentence. However, most applications in geography and
environmental studies do not require extremely fine-grained
temporal resolution. Meteorologists may require visible,
infrared, and radar information at sub-hourly temporal
resolution; urban planners might require imagery at monthly
or annual resolution; and transportation planners may not
need any time series information at all for some applications.
Again, the temporal resolution of imagery used should
. Sometimes
researchers have to search archives of aerial photographs to
get information from that past that pre-date the collection of
satellite imagery. [3점]
* meteorologist : 기상학자 ** infrared: 적외선의
① be selected for general purposes
② meet the requirements of your inquiry
③ be as high as possible for any occasion
④ be applied to new technology by experts
⑤ rely exclusively upon satellite information
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6
8
33. Grief is unpleasant. Would one not then be better off
without it altogether? Why accept it even when the loss is
real? Perhaps we should say of it what Spinoza said of regret:
that whoever feels it is “twice unhappy or twice helpless.”
Laurence Thomas has suggested that the utility of “negative
sentiments” (emotions like grief, guilt, resentment, and anger,
which there is seemingly a reason to believe we might be
better off without) lies in their providing a kind of guarantee
of authenticity for such dispositional sentiments as love
and respect. No occurrent feelings of love and respect need
to be present throughout the period in which it is true that
one loves or respects. One might therefore sometimes
suspect, in the absence of the positive occurrent feelings, that
. At such times,
negative emotions like grief offer a kind of testimonial to the
authenticity of love or respect. [3점]
* dispositional: 성향적인 ** testimonial: 증거
① one no longer loves
② one is much happier
③ an emotional loss can never be real
④ respect for oneself can be guaranteed
⑤ negative sentiments do not hold any longer
34. Over a period of time the buildings which housed social,
legal, religious, and other rituals evolved into forms that we
subsequently have come .
This is a two-way process; the building provides the physical
environment and setting for a particular social ritual such as
traveling by train or going to the theater, as well as the
symbolic setting. The meaning of buildings evolves and
becomes established by experience and we in turn read our
experience into buildings. Buildings arouse an empathetic
reaction in us through these projected experiences, and the
strength of these reactions is determined by our culture, our
beliefs, and our expectations. They tell stories, for their form
and spatial organization give us hints about how they should be
used. Their physical layout encourages some uses and inhibits
others; we do not go backstage in a theater unless especially
invited. Inside a law court the precise location of those
involved in the legal process is an integral part of the design
and an essential part of ensuring that the law is upheld. [3점]
* empathetic : 공감할 수 있는
① to identify and relate to a new architectural trend
② to recognize and associate with those buildings’ function
③ to define and refine by reflecting cross-cultural interactions
④ to use and change into an integral part of our environment
⑤ to alter and develop for the elimination of their meanings
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Most often, you will find or meet people who introduce
themselves in terms of their work or by what they spend time
on. These people introduce themselves as a salesman or an
executive. ① There is nothing criminal in doing this, but
psychologically, we become what we believe. ② Identifying
what we can do in the workplace serves to enhance the quality
of our professional career. ③ People who follow this practice
tend to lose their individuality and begin to live with the notion
that they are recognized by the job they do. ④ However, jobs
may not be permanent, and you may lose your job for
countless reasons, some of which you may not even be
responsible for. ⑤ In such a case, these people suffer from an
inevitable social and mental trauma, leading to emotional
stress and a feeling that all of a sudden they have been
disassociated from what once was their identity.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Interestingly, being observed has two quite distinct
effects on performance. In some cases, performance is
decreased, even to the point of non-existence. The
extreme of this is stage fright, the sudden fear of public
performance.
(A) So, if you are learning to play a new sport, it is better to
begin it alone, but when you become skilled at it, then
you will probably perform better with an audience.
(B) There are many instances of well-known actors who, in
mid-career, develop stage fright and simply cannot
perform. The other extreme is that being observed
enhances performance, people doing whatever it might
be better when they know that others are watching.
(C) The general rule seems to be that if one is doing
something new or for the first time, then being observed
while doing it decreases performance. On the other hand,
being observed while doing some task or engaging in
some activity that is well known or well practiced tends
to enhance performance.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7
8
37.
Evolution works to maximize the number of descendants
that an animal leaves behind. Where the risk of death from
fishing increases as an animal grows, evolution favors
those that grow slowly, mature younger and smaller, and
reproduce earlier.
(A) Surely these adaptations are good news for species
hard-pressed by excessive fishing? Not exactly. Young
fish produce many fewer eggs than large-bodied animals,
and many industrial fisheries are now so intensive that
few animals survive more than a couple of years beyond
the age of maturity.
(B) This is exactly what we now see in the wild. Cod in
Canada’s Gulf of St. Lawrence begin to reproduce at
around four today; forty years ago they had to wait until
six or seven to reach maturity. Sole in the North Sea
mature at half the body weight they did in 1950.
(C) Together this means there are fewer eggs and larvae to
secure future generations. In some cases the amount of
young produced today is a hundred or even a thousand
times less than in the past, putting the survival of species,
and the fisheries dependent on them, at grave risk. [3점]
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Most readers of reports and papers are reading the
documents because they are interested in, and know
something about, the subject.
What is the best order for a report, paper or other technical
document? Of course, it must be logical; but that means
simply that the paper must have connection and sequence,
and a variety of orders is possible under this heading. Too
many writers interpret the term logical to mean chronological,
and it has become habitual to begin reports and papers with
careful reviews of previous work. ( ① ) Usually, this is
tactically weak. ( ② ) Therefore, to rehearse to them the
findings of previous work is simply to bore them with
unnecessary reminders. ( ③ ) The interesting thing for them
is the new information ─ the new findings and conclusions.
( ④ ) So it is usually best to start with those pieces of
information. ( ⑤ ) To give a long chronological account of
work or procedures is normally appropriate only when the
essential point of the paper is the chronological sequence.
* chronological: 연대순의
39.
Rather, they will happen only through state intervention,
based on parliamentary decision.
I expect that global society will increase annual investments
from 24% today to 36% of the GDP in 2052. Much of this
investment will be in energy-efficient goods that are more
expensive than old-fashioned stuff designed for an era of
cheap energy. ( ① ) Another share will be invested in the shift
from coal to more expensive fuels, like conventional gas. ( ② )
Some will go into the construction of new renewable energy
supply, even during the years before it becomes competitive.
( ③ ) And a lot will go into repair of climate damage or
adaptation to future climate damage ─ for example, investing
in new protective walls along the coast to keep the rising
ocean back. ( ④ ) These huge increases in investment would
not come about if investment was left to the market. ( ⑤ ) It
will be either direct, when the government invests the tax
dollars in whatever capacity it considers to be most necessary,
or indirect, when the government passes legislation that makes
the desired activity more profitable.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The impacts of tourism on the environment are evident
to scientists, but not all residents attribute environmental
damage to tourism. Residents commonly have positive
views on the economic and some sociocultural influences
of tourism on quality of life, but their reactions to
environmental impacts are mixed. Some residents feel
tourism provides more parks and recreation areas,
improves the quality of the roads and public facilities, and
does not contribute to ecological decline. Many do not
blame tourism for traffic problems, overcrowded outdoor
recreation, or the disturbance of peace and tranquility of
parks. Alternatively, some residents express concern that
tourists overcrowd the local fishing, hunting, and other
recreation areas or may cause traffic and pedestrian
congestion. Some studies suggest that variations in
residents’ feelings about tourism’s relationship to
environmental damage are related to the type of tourism,
the extent to which residents feel the natural environment
needs to be protected, and the distance residents live from
the tourist attractions.
* tranquility: 고요함 ** congestion: 혼잡
󰀻
Residents do not (A) tourism’s environmental
influences identically since they take (B) postures
based on factors such as the type of tourism, opinions on
the degree of protection, and their distance from an attraction.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① weigh …… dissimilar ② weigh …… common
③ weigh …… balanced ④ control …… favorable
⑤ control …… conflicting
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Duration refers to the time that events last. If we think of
tempo as the speed of events, then duration is the speed of
the clock itself. For the physicist, the duration of a “second”
is precise and unambiguous: it is equal to 9,192,631,770
cycles of the frequency associated with the transition
between two energy levels of the isotope cesium-133. In the
realm of psychological experience, however, quantifying
units of time is a considerably clumsier operation. When
people are removed from the cues of “real” time ─ be it the
sun, bodily fatigue, or timepieces themselves ─ it doesn’t
take long before their time sense breaks down. And it is this
usually (A) psychological clock, as opposed to the
time on one’s watch, that creates the perception of duration
that people experience.
Theoretically, a person who mentally stretches the duration
of time should experience a slower tempo. Imagine, for
example, that baseballs are pitched to two different batters.
The balls are thrown every 5 seconds for 50 seconds, so a
total of 10 balls are thrown. We now ask both batters how
much time has passed. Let’s say that batter number one (who
loves hitting) feels the duration to be 40 seconds. Batter
number two (bored by baseball) believes it to be 60 seconds.
Psychologically, then, the first person has experienced
baseballs approaching every four seconds while the second
sees it as every six seconds. The perceived tempo, in other
words, is (B) for batter number one.
* isotope: 동위원소 ** clumsy: 서투른
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① What Timepieces Bring to Our Lives
② Research into Time: Precision vs. Duration
③ Flight from Time: A New Direction for Physics
④ The Peaceful Coexistence of Science and Baseball
⑤ How Long, How Fast: A Matter of Time Perception
42. 윗글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① delayed …… faster ② internal …… slower
③ accurate …… slower ④ imprecise …… faster
⑤ mysterious …… slower
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
A seventeen-year-old German boy named Erik Brandes
stepped out onto the empty vast stage of the Cologne Opera
House. It was the most exciting day of Erik’s life. (a) The
youngest concert promoter in Germany had persuaded the
Opera House to host a late-night concert of improvised jazz
by the American pianist Keith Jarrett. The concert was a
sellout, and later that evening, Keith would sit down at the
piano and play.
* improvise: 즉흥적으로 연주하다
(B)
When Keith began to play, everybody immediately knew
this was magic. Erik too was deeply touched. Keith was
unexpectedly producing the performance of a lifetime
despite the shortcomings of the piano. (b) His left hand
produced thundering, repetitive bass riffs as a way of
covering up the piano’s lack of resonance. Keith really had
to play that piano very hard to get enough volume to get to
the balconies. Standing up and sitting down, Keith played
the unplayable piano to produce something unique. It wasn’t
the music that he ever imagined playing. But faced with a
challenge, he accepted it and flew high.
* bass riff: 저음 반복 악절 ** resonance: 울림, 반향
(C)
Understandably, Keith didn’t want to perform. He left and
went to wait in his car, leaving Erik to anticipate the arrival
of soon-to-be furious concert-goers. Desperate, (c) the
German teenager caught up with Keith and begged the jazz
pianist to play. The pianist looked out at him standing in the
rain, completely soaked, and took pity on him. “Never
forget,” Keith said. “Only for (d) you.” A few hours later,
Keith walked out to the unplayable piano in front of a
packed concert hall.
(D)
But when Erik introduced Keith and his producer Manfred
to the piano on the stage that afternoon, it didn’t go well.
Keith and Manfred played a few notes. Then after a long
silence, Manfred came to (e) him and said, “Erik, if you
don’t get another piano, Keith can’t play tonight.” Erik knew
that Keith had requested a specific instrument, which the
Opera House had agreed to provide. What he hadn’t realized
was that the administrative staff hadn’t been able to find the
requested Bösendorfer piano, and they had instead installed
a tiny little Bösendorfer that was in poor condition.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 연주회의 표가 매진되었다.
② 연주가 시작되자마자 관객들은 감동을 받았다.
③ Keith는 충분한 피아노 음량을 만들기 위해 노력했다.
④ Keith는 빗속에 서 있는 Erik을 보고도 외면했다.
⑤ Keith와 Manfred는 연주회장의 피아노를 쳐 보았다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.