2009년 6월


1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 사용할 표지판을 고르시오. [1점]


2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
(1) proud 	(2) jealous 	(3) curious 
(4) worried 	(5) nervous 

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. 
(1) a cartoon 	(2) a brochure	(3) a headline 
(4) an editorial 	(5) a photograph 

4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
(1) to park her car 
(2) to give him a ride 
(3) to fix the broken bicycle 
(4) to take his son to a doctor 
(5) to inform him of the repair expenses 

5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 선물 값으로 여자에게 주어야 할 금액을 고르시오. [3점] 
(1) $18   (2) $20   (3) $36  (4) $40   (5) $50

6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
(1) 야생 동물 보호의 중요성을 강조하려고
(2) 동물 실험 윤리 강화에 대해 홍보하려고
(3) 애완 동물 응급 처치 요령을 설명하려고
(4) 여름철 애완 동물 관리 방법을 안내하려고 
(5) 동물 애호가 협회에 대한 지원을 촉구하려고

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
(1) 친구에게 전화하기
(2) 전화번호 알려주기
(3) 전화기 수리 맡기기
(4) 휴대전화기 분실신고하기
(5) 고객에게 메시지 전달하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
(1) 정육점 주인 ─ 손님 
(2) 식당 지배인 ─ 웨이터 
(3) 음식점 주인 ─ 배달원
(4) 비행기 승무원 ─ 승객
(5) 학교 영양사 ─ 조리사 

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오. 
(1) 운동화 빨래방 	(2) 구두 수선점
(3) 발 전문 병원		(4) 기차역 매표소
(5) 디자인 학교 

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
(1) 박물관 방문하기 	(2) 사진기 찾아오기 
(3) 도시락 주문하기 	(4) 건전기 교환하기 
(5) 아침 식사 준비하기 

11. 다음 일정표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 보게 될 경기를 고르시오.


12. 다음을 듣고, Community Service Award에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
(1) 올해의 시상은 졸업한 선배가 한다.
(2) 지원 자격은 지역 사회봉사 40시간 이상이다.
(3) 자기 자신뿐만 아니라 친구도 추천할 수 있다.
(4) 지원서는 학교 홈페이지에서 내려 받을 수 있다.
(5) 지원서 제출 마감일은 5월 6일이다.


13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  

(1) 	(2) 	(3) 	(4) 	(5)

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man : ___________________________
(1) Okay. I’ll tell Jane to fill in for you. 
(2) Great! She’d love to take the position. 
(3) I promise I’ll consider your resignation. 
(4) Good, but you should withdraw your resignation. 
(5) Thank you. I’ll find someone as soon as possible. 

15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Woman : ____________________________
(1) Probably not. He needs all the rest he can get. 
(2) I don’t think he can. His plane is arriving soon. 
(3) No. He didn’t say anything when he left this morning. 
(4) Of course, he can. He should be at the theater by now. 
(5) He already left to buy flowers for your performance. 

16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man : ____________________________
(1) You need to learn to motivate your students better. 
(2) Please make sure to turn in your homework today. 
(3) That’s exactly what I need. So how do I join? 
(4) Welcome. What activities would you like to sign up for? 
(5) My group members have been very cooperative with me. 

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Michael이 Sam에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Michael : _______________________________
(1) How about joining a health club? 
(2) Lucky you! I wish I could be like you. 
(3) You look tired. You should stop working out. 
(4) Be patient. Everyone’s progress is different. 
(5) Do you want to be my workout partner? 


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?[1점]
This started as early as 8000 B.C. During the New Stone Age as people began to settle into fixed agricultural communities, this intensified. Originally raised mainly for their meat, sheep and goats became valuable also for their milk and wool. Cattle were domesticated both for meat and skin and as work animals for agriculture. Their milk production was not a factor until much later in history when breeding for high milk production produced suitable cows. Horses were also domesticated and became important for transportation and came to play a major part in warfare.
(1) 축산  (2) 조경 (3) 수송 (4) 임업 (5) 수렵

19. 밑줄 친 She[she]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? [1점]
A woman stopped at a flower shop to order some flowers to be wired to her mother who lived 100 miles away. As (1) she got out of her car, she noticed a girl sitting on the street sobbing. The woman asked the girl what was wrong and she replied, "I wanted to buy a red rose for my mother, but I only have 75 cents and a rose costs two dollars." (2) She smiled and said, "Came on in with me. I'll buy you a rose for your mother." (3) She placed her order of flowers to her mother and bought a rose for the girl. As they were leaving, she offered the girl a ride. (4) She responded, "Yes, please, if you could. Take me to my mother." The little girl directed her to a grave and placed the rose on it. This changed the woman's plan! (5) She returned to the flower shop, canceled the wire order, picked up a bouquet of fresh roses, and drove 100 miles to meet her mother.

20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Mr. Brown wanted his students to learn math in the context of real life. He felt it was not enough for them just to work out problems from a book. To show his students how math could really help (1) them, he held several contests during the year. The contests allowed his students (2) to have fun while they practiced math and raised money. Once he filled a fishbowl with marbles, asked the students to guess how many marbles there were, and (3) awarded a free lunch to the winner. Another time they entered a contest to guess how many soda cans the back of a pickup truck (4) was held. To win, they had to practice their skills at estimating, multiplying, dividing, and measuring. They used (5) most of the prize money for an end-of-the-year field trip.

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
It is hard for street trees to survive with only foot-square holes in the pavement. The average life of a street tree surrounded by concrete and asphalt (A) [is / are] seven to fifteen years. Many factors underground determine if a street tree will make it. If the soil is so dense that the roots cannot get in, it will surely die. If they can get in, there is a better chance of getting the water and nutrients (B) [needing / needed] to survive. Another question is whether adequate water supplies are getting into the growing area. Some of the water comes from underground sources and some from rain, and it is hard to measure (C) [where / what] the tree is getting it. Of course, if the roots get into the sewers, they can get everything they need.
  (A)      (B)        (C)
(1) is  --- needing --- where
(2) is  --- needing --- what
(3) is  --- needed --- where
(4) are --- needing --- where
(5) are --- needed --- what

22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
If you lead a busy life and are short of time, you may find that you are eating a full meal only about once a day. (1) From the standpoint of health this is a bad practice. (2) You would be treating your body with more consideration if you had several small meals instead of a single big one. (3) A given amount of food is used more efficiently by the body if it is spaced throughout the day rather than eaten at one sitting. (4) Such symptoms are likely to occur in people who drink more than five cups of strong black coffee in a single day. (5) People who have large, infrequent meals tend to gain more weight and to have a higher level of fat in the blood than do those who eat smaller quantities (but the same total) at regular intervals.


[23~27] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
23. 
We push down our feelings because most of us have been brought up to believe that there are feelings which are unacceptable. Some of us learned that all emotions are unacceptable, while others learned that specific emotions such as anger or crying are unacceptable. In fact, there is absolutely nothing wrong with any kind of feeling. When someone tells you not to feel sad or angry, he or she is asking the impossible. You can deny the feelings you are having but you cannot stop them from coming. All that feelings need, in order to pass, is to be acknowledged and accepted. Just saying to yourself, or someone else, 'I feel angry' (or sad, or frightened) is a great start. Let yourself _________ the feelings, good or bad.
(1) deny	(2) hide		(3) respect
(4) choose	(5) distinguish

24. [3점]
Human beings direct their activities toward the satisfaction of physical wants and general well-being. They avoid, whenever possible, situations that may bring about physical deprivation, including pain, hunger, and a need for sleep. Much contemporary advertising promises these satisfactions, whether from headache remedies, fancy foods, or form-fitting mattresses. An individual can suffer any of these deprivations temporarily, however, and he may knowingly enter into situations which will deprive him for a time if he believes that there will be _________________. The willingness of astronauts to undergo periods of intense training is at least partially explainable in terms of the great rest that they know will come at the end of their missions. 
(1) creative advertising	(2) physical contact
(3) ultimate satisfaction 	(4) emotional imbalance  
(5) mental illness

25. 
No matter how we shake or tap the bottle of ketchup, some of it refuses to come out. In some cases, up to 20 percent of the product is left in the packaging when it is thrown out. This is not only annoying for consumers but also poses difficulties when recycling: The leftovers first have to be removed from the packaging, which is expensive, time-consuming, and uses a great deal of water. A German project by the Fraunhofer Institutes, together with Munich University of Technology and various industrial partners, will put an end to this dilemma. Researchers are applying thin films, no more than 20 nanometers thick, to the inside surface of packaging in order to __________________. 
(1) keep ketchup fresh
(2) remove tap water
(3) develop nanotechnology
(4) reduce leftover traces 
(5) increase the price of ketchup

26. 
When we have made an error, as for example in adding up a column of figures, we have a tendency to repeat it again and again. This phenomenon is known as the persistent error. The same thing happens when we try to solve a problem; each time our thoughts take a certain course, that course is more likely to be followed the next time. The reason that we keep making the same error repeatedly is that associations form between the ideas in the chain of thoughts and become firmer each time they are used, until finally the connections are so well established that ___________________. Thus, once we have adopted an unprofitable line of thought, it is harder to adopt a profitable line. 
(1) the chain is very difficult to break 
(2) persistent problems are solved automatically
(3) the ideas lose their associations with one another 
(4) those connections become weaker as time goes by 
(5) the phenomenon will lead to a profitable line of thought




27. 
About three percent of the weight of sea water is accounted for by salt. The salt content of the ocean is being continually added to by runoff from the land, but it is not increasing. Yet salt cannot leave the sea by evaporation because the water vapor leaves it behind. So for many years it was a mystery as to why the sea should ________________, given the rate of runoff, and particularly if the world was supposed to be hundreds of millions of years old. The riddle was not solved until the 1970s, when the deep ocean openings were discovered. Sea water is swallowed up by these cracks in the ocean bed; when it reemerges, millions of years later, as steam from volcanoes, the salt has been filtered out of it on its passage through the rocks. 
(1) be so deep and large 
(2) create so much runoff 
(3) have so little salt in it
(4) have so many volcanoes
(5) keep its temperature so steady

28. (A), (B), (C) 의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
A blind spot is not the same as a simple lack of knowledge. A blind spot emerges from a (A) [resistance / connection] to learning in a particular area. At the root of many of our blind spots are a number of emotions or attitudes fear being the most obvious, but also pride, self-satisfaction, and anxiety. A manager, for example, might have unsurpassed knowledge in the financial field, but her understanding of people management might be (B) [flooded / limited]. Her people find her cold and aloof and want her to become more consultative and involved with the team. She, however, is not willing to accept feedback about her management style and refuses to even consider the (C) [prospect / retrospect] of changing her management style. * aloof: 냉담한
     (A)          (B)        (C)
(1) resistance --- limited --- prospect
(2) resistance --- flooded --- retrospect
(3) resistance --- limited --- retrospect
(4) connection --- flooded --- prospect
(5) connection --- limited --- retrospect

29. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I'의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I start my long journey with great enthusiasm. The thought of conquering the mountain stirs me with anticipation. Although the freezing wind pounds upon me, I feel flushed with warmth. Just after ten o’clock in the morning, I finally put my step on the ice-covered peak of the mountain. A childlike joy spreads through me. I am the two hundred and ninth person to stand on the summit of Mount Everest. My heart races as I take in this glorious moment. The sky is deep blue and cloudless. For fifteen minutes I cherish the view as the highest person on earth. I do not feel the tiredness in my legs, for the journey has been truly worthwhile. 
(1) irritated and nervous 
(2) cold and indifferent  
(3) anxious and gloomy 
(4) excited and satisfied  
(5) touched and sympathetic

30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?



The figure above shows the equipment for downhill and cross-country skiing and their recommended sizes. As you can see, the downhill ski is (1)shorter and wider than the cross-country ski and is about the height of the skier. The cross-country ski meets the (2)elbow when the arm is held above the head. In either case, a slightly heavier or more experienced skier might want a longer ski, and a lighter or beginning skier might prefer a shorter ski. The cross-country pole is longer than the one for downhill skiing, and its tip is (3)bent. The length of the cross-country pole reaches the armpit. The downhill pole fits comfortably in the hand about two inches (4)below the armpit. The bottom of the downhill boot attaches completely to the ski, while the (5)heel of the cross-country boot is not fastened to the ski. 
*armpit: 겨드랑이

31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Early photography continued the trend toward the imprisonment of the subject and the object of representation. During photography’s first decades, exposure times were quite long. ____(A)____, the daguerreotype process required exposures of four to seven minutes in the sun and from twelve to sixty minutes indoors. Early photographs represented the world as stable, eternal, and unshakable. And when photography ventured to represent living things, they had to be immobilized. ____(B)____, portrait studios universally employed various holding devices to assure the steadiness of the sitter throughout the lengthy time of exposure. The devices firmly held the person in place. In other words, a person who wanted to see his own image became a voluntary prisoner of the machine. 
* daguerreotype: 은판(銀板) 사진술


     (A)            (B)
(1) For instance --- Instead
(2) For instance --- Thus
(3) Otherwise    --- Thus
(4) Otherwise    --- Instead
(5) Otherwise    --- However

[32~33] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
32. 
Sometimes all a good cheese needs to stop it from going bad is a sympathetic ear. Researchers in France have come up with an ultrasonic sensor that will listen to cheese as it matures and warn cheese makers of defects. Cheese makers have to downgrade up to one-fifth of their produce because of undetected faults. If the new device works well, that problem could be reduced. The technique involves sending a low frequency ultrasonic signal through the cheese to a sensor at the other side. By measuring the change in the speed and size of the emerging signal, the moisture and porosity of the cheese can be mapped. 
*porosity:  물질의 내부에 작은 구멍이 많은 성질
(1) 치즈 생산량 감소의 원인 탐색 
(2) 국가별 치즈 생산 방법의 특징 
(3) 치즈 숙성에 필요한 시간과 습도 조절 
(4) 치즈 영양 분석을 위한 초음파 이용 방법 
(5) 초음파 감지기를 이용한 치즈의 결함 탐지

33. 
Nobody likes performance reviews. Employees are nervous they will hear nothing but criticism, and bosses are nervous their direct reports will respond defensively. So people generally keep their mouths shut. That is unfortunate because most employees need help figuring out how to improve their performance and advance their careers. Also, it can be harmful to the company if a lack of clear feedback leads to undesirable work behaviors. There is a way to avoid this problem. Managers can help employees learn adaptive techniques like acknowledging negative emotions and reframing fears and criticisms constructively to prevent destructive responses. Once people are comfortable asking for feedback, they will begin to see how they are doing relative to management’s priorities, and their work will be more in line with organizational goals. 
(1) necessity of a feedback-friendly working environment 
(2) improvement of working conditions for new employees
(3) importance of roles of management in employee placement  
(4) development of upper-level management training programs  
(5) significance of a feedback analysis of the welfare policy

34. 다음 글에서 작곡가에 관한 필자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Composers describe their private world through the use of sound. Making such a description concrete and detailed requires not just inspiration but certain practical tools and skills. No matter what style of music you write, you need to understand dynamics and speed, the uses of harmony and rhythm. You also need to know the range and capabilities of instruments, the possibilities of the human voice, and the problems of acoustics. You need to be able to devise a blueprint that communicates to your musicians what it is you want to hear. A young composer who takes a shortcut in this technical training in his rush to play the role of a composer will dry up very fast. If you learn the proper techniques, then the passion, if it is genuine, will come through. 
(1) 연주자와 의사소통을 자주 해야 한다. 
(2) 전문가로부터 작곡법을 배워야 한다. 
(3) 예술적 영감을 중요시해야 한다.
(4) 악기의 제작 과정을 잘 알아야 한다. 
(5) 실질적인 음악 지식과 기법을 익혀야 한다.

35. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?[3점]

The above table shows the differences in technology product use on a weekly basis among grade groups of students and teachers in the U.S. (1) As the students go up in grade group, the percentage of technology product use also increases. (2) The percentage of desktop computer use is the highest, immediately followed by that of video game player use by all three student groups. (3) With respect to cell phones, 39% of the students in the kindergarten to grade 3 group use them, whereas 49% and 75% of the students in the grade 4~6 and 7~12 
groups use them, respectively. (4) For desktop and laptop computer use, the teachers show a higher percentage than all three student groups. (5) The teachers have a lower percentage of MP3 player and video game player use than all three student groups. 

36. Costa Rica에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Costa Rica means ‘rich coast’ in Spanish. It was discovered in 1502 and named by Christopher Columbus, who thought it might be a land rich with gold. However, Costa Rica has no great mineral wealth. It has, instead, rich soil and a moderate climate. While other Latin American nations suffered exploitation from outside the region and developed societies split by class conflict between rich and poor, Costa Rica developed an agricultural economy made up of numerous small farmers. There was not great wealth, but what there was was spread evenly. Costa Rica continued its unusual development after it separated from Spain in 1821, becoming the first Latin American country to abolish slavery. In 1889 the little nation held the first free election in Latin America.
(1) 금을 비롯한 광물자원이 풍부한 나라이다.
(2) 토양은 비옥하지만 기후는 온화하지 않다.
(3) 대규모 농장을 바탕으로 한 농업경제가 발달하였다.
(4) 라틴 아메리카에서 노예제도를 폐지한 마지막 국가이다.
(5) 라틴 아메리카에서 최초로 자유선거를 실시하였다.


37. TLA에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
In the early 1960s, Jill Norris, the mother of two sons with learning difficulties, began to exchange appropriate toys with other families; out of this she founded the Toy Libraries Association (TLA). The association opened toy libraries in community centers, clinics, schools, public libraries, and hospitals around the world. From these toy libraries parents and children could borrow toys knowing that they have been thoroughly tried and tested, not only for their play value but also for safety. Over the years, the association has involved leading professional educators and therapists, alongside parents, in the production of numerous publications on specific toys and aspects of play. In its early years, the association was opposed by the toy industry because it was likely to reduce sales of toys as children were borrowing them. 
(1) 다른 가족과의 장난감 교환을 계기로 시작 되었다.
(2) 세계 곳곳의 병원에 장난감 도서관을 세웠다.
(3) 장난감 도서관의 장난감은 안정성 시험을 받았다.
(4) 출판물 제작에 교육 전문가를 참여시켰다.
(5) 초기에 장난감 업계로부터 환영을 받았다.




[38~39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. 
Clients send a steady stream of clues and messages through their facial expression, body movement, and voice pitch. Counselors need to learn how to read these messages without distorting or overinterpreting them in order to establish and maintain relationships with their clients. For instance, when Denise says to Jennie, “It seems that it’s hard for you to talk about yourself,” Jennie says, “No, I don’t mind at all.” But the real answer is probably in her nonverbal behavior, for she speaks hesitatingly while looking away and frowning. Reading such clues helps Denise understand Jennie better. Our nonverbal behavior has a way of ‘leaking’ messages about what we really mean. The unplanned nature of nonverbal behavior contributes to this leakage even in the case of highly defensive clients. 
(1) 상담가는 의뢰인과의 상담 기록을 잘 보관해야 한다.
(2) 상담가는 의뢰인의 대인 관계에 주의를 기울여야 한다.
(3) 상담가는 의뢰인의 개인 정보를 유출하지 않아야 한다.
(4) 상담가는 의뢰인의 비언어적 표현을 바르게 파악해야한다.
(5) 상담가는 의뢰인과의 신뢰 형성을 기본 원칙으로 해야 한다.

39. 
Sweeping statements have been made about the effect of clothing on the behavior of a child. It has been said that a child who is better dressed is better behaved, and that a child who is dressed like a cowboy is louder than he is when dressed in ordinary clothes. Clothing, however, might have a temporary effect on the behavior of the child, but not a lasting effect. That is, we would predict that a child who was dressed in his best clothes and whose mother stressed that they were ‘best’ would be better behaved for a short period, but by the end of the hour the child would have forgotten his clothes and would be acting as he would in old clothes. Likewise, the child who is dressed in a cowboy outfit might be very noisy while playing cowboys for a brief time, but he might soon change to another activity and be no more noisy than usual. 
(1) 아이들은 활동하기에 적합한 옷을 선호한다.
(2) 어려서부터 단정한 복장을 습관화해야 한다.
(3) 화려한 의상은 아이들의 행동을 제약한다.
(4) 엄마의 취향이 자녀들의 옷 선택에 영향을 준다.
(5) 옷이 아이들의 행동에 미치는 영향은 일시적이다.

40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

Due to this trade, the plant variety became widespread in a region. 

For thousands of years, farmers at harvest time have selected seeds, cuttings, or tubers from superior plants to save for the next planting. ((1)) Farmers often protected the stored seeds from insects or animals by sealing them in clay pots or burying them in baskets covered with ash. ((2)) They also often stored tubers in cold areas and either replanted cuttings immediately or kept them dry until the next planting time. ((3)) Farmers thus saved their genetic stocks from season to season. ((4)) They could exchange remaining stocks with neighbors or exchange them in the local market. ((5)) Organized seed production, however, did not begin until the early 1900s. 
* tuber: (감자 등의) 덩이줄기

[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. 



A study found that enrollment in physical education classes was not related to academic achievement scores, but involvement in vigorous physical activity was. Students who engaged in vigorous activity outside of school at least 20 minutes per day, three days per week, were found to have higher academic scores. Students in the physical education class spent an average of only 19 minutes out of a 55-minute class engaged in moderate-to-vigorous physical activity. Given that this amount and intensity of activity in physical education classes had no correlation to students’ academic achievement, whereas there was a significant association between academic achievement and vigorous activity outside of school, the researchers propose that there may be a certain minimum level of activity necessary to produce the potentially desirable effects. 
*enrollment: 등록
(1) Intense Physical Activity: Healthy or Not? 
(2) Physical Activity Levels and Academic Achievement
(3) Academic Achievement and Amount of Study lime 
(4) How to Increase Enrollment in Physical Education  
(5) Student Health and In-class Physical Education

42. 
The tragic heroes in Shakespeare’s plays have free will. They possess their own defects of character that bring their downfalls. Macbeth is ambitious but weak; Othello is jealous; Hamlet cannot make up his mind but all three might have made themselves into better human beings. Nothing outside themselves prevents them from taking the right path as opposed to the wrong, or tragic, path. On the other hand, for the heroes in Greek tragedies where fate embodied in the oracles prevails, there is no free will. The gods control a man’s destiny, and one cannot fight the gods. Regardless of their strength or wisdom, the heroes cannot control their own future. That is why the heroes in Greek tragedies can be compared to fish in the net.  *oracle: 신탁(神託)
(1) Types of Heroes in Shakespearean Tragedies 
(2) Lack of Moral Messages in Western Tragedies
(3) Influence of Greek Tragedies on Shakespearean Plays 
(4) Conflict Between Gods and Heroes in Greek Tragedies  
(5) Difference Between Shakespearean and Greek Tragic Heroes


43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

When we look at the world and ourselves, we do it through a set of filters. Think about what a filter is. A filter is a mechanism that lets some things flow in but screens other things out. 

(A) Through them, we process and assign a weight and meaning to every event in our lives. Some things flow in, others are screened out, but everything is affected: not just what we ‘see,’ but what we ‘hear’ and ‘believe.’ 
(B) Depending on what the filter is made up of, it can also alter whatever is looked at or passes through it. Sunglasses are a good example of a visual filter. 
(C) But, obviously, I am not talking here about some physical apparatus that we can put on and take off, like a pair of glasses. In fact, the filters I am mentioning are internal, mental, emotional, verbal, and perceptual in nature. 
(1) (A)-(B)-(C)	(2) (A)-(C)-(B) (3) (B)-(A)-(C)
(4) (B)-(C)-(A)  	(5) (C)-(B)-(A)

44. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The descriptions of sound production have been rewritten in this edition so as to update the theory on which they were based and to provide better practical advice regarding pronunciation problems. Several figures have been redrawn in order to achieve greater accuracy and clearer detail. The authors have tried to eliminate traces of gender-biased attitudes wherever they were detected, and a definite attempt has been made to balance female and male references. The most significant kind of change in the new edition, however, is the result of the effort we have made to introduce more use of language for real communicative purposes in the learning activities suggested for students to carry out. 
(1) 개정판의 주요 변화를 설명하려고 
(2) 새로운 언어 학습법을 제시하려고
(3) 새 책의 출판 일정을 안내하려고 
(4) 새로운 편집 규정을 통보하려고
(5) 최근의 발음 이론을 소개하려고

45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The introduction of the player piano in the United States at the turn of the 20th century had been accompanied by fairly critical comments. Player pianos produced music mechanically through a set of instructions stored on a music roll. Although proponents of the player piano such as piano manufacturers and publishers of sheet music thought that it would lead to ‘an almost universal music education,’ many music teachers, musicians, and composers opposed it. Opponents claimed that one could copy sound, but not interpretation, and that mechanical instruments reduced the expression of music to mathematical systems. For this reason, they believed that mechanized music lessened the ideal of beauty by ‘producing the same after same, with no soul, no joy, no passion,’ and that the introduction of the player piano would lead to the disappearance of amateur players. 
* proponent: 옹호자

While some believed that the player piano would provide a universal music education, others criticized its ____(A)____ music from a(n) ____(B)____ viewpoint. 

	(A)		(B)
(1) recorded 	---	economical
(2) repetitive 	---	commercial
(3) harmonious 	---	conservative
(4) mechanized	---	artistic
(5) artificial 	---	political

[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A) 
Several years ago, we were asked to help with the merger of two community volunteer groups, who wanted to join together in order to establish an agency that would have more influence and better financing than the two separate agencies of the past. Both were rural groups, which had traditionally and geographically been separated by a range of mountains. 
(B) 
In leading the planning meetings of the two boards, he carefully kept the groups focused on the long-range issues, and convinced them not to look at the headquarters question until the very end of the process. Once the organizational structure was set, by-laws agreed upon, and all the volunteers had actually merged, then the headquarters site was decided on logically and easily, as it turned out. 
(C) 
We worked with the two groups to help them set goals, develop policy, and build an organizational structure. Meanwhile, the young executive director, who saw a successful merger as his primary responsibility, was especially careful about one thing. On either side of the mountain was a large town. Each of the former agencies had its own board, a separate staff, and long-standing regional ties. The executive director understood that the question of where the new joint agency’s headquarters would be was an important question as well as a potentially explosive one. 
(D) 
By then everyone was so committed to the organization and its goals that the headquarters question had become a relatively unimportant, routine one. The executive director of the merging agencies was primarily concerned about the long-range good of the organization and the total community. He used all his influence and persuasive powers to make that a common focus, and the results were successful. 

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) (B)-(C)-(D) 	(2) (B)-(D)-(C) 	(3) (C)-(B)-(D) 
(4) (D)-(B)-(C)  	(5) (D)-(C)-(B)

47. 위 글(C)의 밑줄 친 one thing이 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) 경제적인 지원	(2) 본부 위치의 결정 
(3) 이사회의 회직 제정 	(4) 산간 지역의 개발 
(5) 직원들의 책임감 고취

48. 위 글이 시사하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) 기업의 성장은 지역사회 발전에 도움을 준다.
(2) 조직의 화합을 위해 동호회를 활성화해야 한다.
(3) 장기적인 관점에서 본질적 문제 해결에 집중해야 한다.
(4) 의사 결정을 할 때 소수의 의견을 존중해야 한다.
(5) 개인의 잠재력을 계발에는 인내가 필요하다.



[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
   It was spring and some 6th grade boys at a suburban elementary school were fooling around on the playground. They had discovered a great new trick. One of them would kneel down behind someone and the other would push the person over. The trick worked perfectly with (a) Anna. She fell over with ease. She was hurt and crying. In the process (b) she had broken her wrist. The yard duty staff sent the shaken boys to the principal. 
   The principal began by saying that she understood that they were playing and had not meant to cause serious harm, but that, in fact, they had. She explained that the girl would have to wear a cast for weeks and now lots of ordinary things would be more difficult for (c) her. She pointed out that the girl played the flute and would now not be able to play in the spring concert. By the time (d) she finished, the boys were in tears and very sorry for what they had done. The principal also suspended the boys for a day, explaining to them that even though she knew they were sorry and had not meant to cause such harm, she believed suspension was necessary to signal to everyone in the community the seriousness of the situation. On their own, the boys brought (e) the girl flowers and apologized for hurting her. 
* suspend: 정학시키다

49. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
(1) (a)	(2) (b)	(3) (c)	(4) (d)	(5) (e)

50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) Taking Responsibility for Your Actions
(2) Respecting Students' Privacy
(3) Importance of Self-respect
(4) Roles of Family in Childhood
(5) Negative Consequences of Suspension

2009년 9월

1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 손전등을 고르시오. 


2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
(1) upset       	(2) jealous	(3) relieved  
(4) satisfied	(5) apologetic

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오.
(1) 생물학	(2) 천문학	(3) 지리학
(4) 물리학	(5) 기상학

4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) 프로젝터 빌려 오기   
(2) 회의장 예약하기
(3) 회의용 자료 복사하기     
(4) 회의용 다과 준비하기 
(5) 프론트 데스크에 전화하기

5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불해야 할 금액을 고르시오. 
(1) $60        	(2) $65         	(3) $80
(4) $100      	(5) $105

6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) 특별 할인 행사를 홍보하려고
(2) 예약제 시행을 공지하려고
(3) 가격 인상을 알리려고
(4) 염색용 물품을 광고하려고
(5) 최신 헤어스타일을 소개하려고

7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) 행사 포스터 만들기
(2) 행사 날짜 정하기
(3) 회원 가입 권유하기
(4) 행사용 과자 굽기
(5) 회원 주소록 만들기

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
(1) 학생 — 보건 교사
(2) 비평가 — 영화 감독
(3) 성우 — 녹음 담당자
(4) 연극배우 — 무대 담당자
(5) 모델 — 사진 편집 기사

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
(1) 창고 	(2) 등대		(3) 응접실
(4) 조선소	(5) 양식장

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) 음료수 가져오기
(2) 유니폼 준비하기
(3) 축구공 빌려오기
(4) 구급 상자 사오기
(5) 피자 주문하기

11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 물고기를 고르시오. [3점]


12. 멀티미디어실에 관한 안내 방송을 듣고, 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
(1) 9월 15일에 학생들에게 개방한다.
(2) 주중 오전 8시부터 밤 9시까지 운영한다.
(3) 대형 TV와 개인용 시청 부스가 있다.
(4) 자료 대여 기간은 최장 열흘이다.
(5) 복사나 출력을 할 때는 현금을 내야 한다.

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
     
(1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: _________________________________
(1) Good job. The photograph of the waterfall came out nice. 
(2) I’m sorry. I didn’t know I wasn’t allowed to do that. 
(3) Too bad. Let’s never come to this park again. 
(4) That’s a great idea. Let me get the camera out.
(5) I agree. These flowers are not worth taking a picture of.

15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman: _________________________________
(1) I should have brought my sandals. 
(2) I don’t want to lose my racket. 
(3) I didn’t want to play anyway. 
(4) I have to change my clothes. 
(5) I’ll be back really quickly.

16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: _________________________________
(1) Just remember not to fall down on the ground. 
(2) Now I know why you didn’t follow my advice.
(3) I appreciate your explanation of the concept to me. 
(4) I don’t understand why your science book is wrong. 
(5) Science isn’t hard if you understand the basic concepts.

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Amy가 Steve에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Amy: _________________________________
(1) Great! This plant is very expensive.
(2) Don’t worry. I’m just glad you’re not hurt. 
(3) This is terrible! I’m so disappointed in you. 
(4) Watch out! No more allowance for you. 
(5) Cheer up. I’m glad you replanted it.



18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
This is used in product manufacturing. This is designed by determining the sequences of operations for the manufacturing of each product component as well as the final product. Work assignments, the number of machines, and production rates are coordinated so that all operations performed along this work successfully together. All movement of product parts on this is simplified, with no crossing over, backtracking, or repetition. This is increasingly being handled by computers, which monitor information and adjust the flow of parts accordingly. This usually consists of conveyor belts on which workers perform specific functions. Nowadays, automatic machinery and industrial robots are taking the place of human workers on this.
(1) 조립 라인		(2) 가내 수공업
(3) 보안 시스템		(4) 교통 안내 체계
(5) 화재 경보 장치



19. 밑줄 친 he[He]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
For a year Danny had trained hard to master the famous Pikes Peak Marathon. But when running the actual marathon, he was feeling weary and tired. In a narrow path through the woods, (1) he got stuck behind a slow, weak runner wearing a T-shirt with ‘Bob’s #4’ written on the back. (2) He felt even more tired because he had to lag behind the fellow. As he was finally overtaking the runner, out of curiosity, (3) he asked him, “What’s Bob’s #4?” “My friend Bob had a dream to run this marathon four times,” he answered. (4) He ran it three times, but then last year he died. So I decided to complete his dream for him. This is Bob’s #4.” Suddenly, all the exhaustion (5) he had been feeling during the race disappeared.

20. 다음 글의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
We are addicted to our cars. We do not think twice before driving to pick something up at a store that is only three blocks away. In fact, we romanticize driving with our thoughts of long Sunday drives and adventurous cross-country road trips. Well, we need to get rid of this addiction — and fast — because driving is harmful to our health and to our planet’s health. The air pollutants that spit out from the car exhaust pipes have been proven to cause cancer, and the carbon dioxide that is emitted causes global warming. One of the easiest ways to reduce these emissions is simply to change our mind-set about driving. We need to make driving our last choice of transportation to live a happy, healthy life. And the first step in achieving this new mind-set is to reorganize our lives so we do not need to drive much or far.
(1) 가능하면 자동차 사용을 줄이자.
(2) 친환경 자동차 개발을 서두르자.
(3) 타인을 배려하는 운전습관을 기르자.
(4) 교통 법규를 준수하여 사고를 최소화하자.
(5) 자동차를 이용한 여행 문화를 활성화시키자.

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
No matter what we are shopping for, it is not primarily a brand we are choosing, but a culture, or rather the  people associated with that culture. (A) [Whatever / Whether] you wear torn jeans or like to recite poetry, by doing so you make a statement of belonging to a group of people. Who we believe we are (B) [is / are] a result of the choices we make about who we want to be like, and we subsequently demonstrate this desired likeness to others in various and often subtle ways. Artificial as this process is, this is what becomes our ‘identity,’ an identity (C) [grounded / grounding] on all the superficial differences we distinguish between ourselves and others. This, after all, is what we are shopping for: self-identity, knowledge of who we are.
     (A)        (B)      (C)
(1) Whatever…… is……  grounded
(2) Whatever…… are…… grounding
(3) Whether……  is……  grounded
(4) Whether……  are…… grounding
(5) Whether……  are…… grounded

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Almost every day I play a game with myself (1) that I call ‘time machine.’ I made it up in response to my erroneous belief that what I was all worked up about was really important. (2) To play ‘time machine’ all you have to do is to imagine that whatever circumstance you are dealing with is not happening right now but a year from now. It might be an argument with your spouse, a mistake, or a lost opportunity, but it is highly (3) likely that a year from now you are not going to care. It will be one more irrelevant detail in your life. While this simple game will not solve (4) every your problems, it can give you an enormous amount of needed perspective. I find myself laughing at things that I used to (5) take far too seriously.

23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
There are some areas of mathematics where long, unpleasant but basically routine calculations have to be done, and there are some good computer programs for doing them. (1) Thus, computers can be very useful time-saving devices, sometimes so much so that they enable mathematicians to discover results that they could not have discovered on their own. (2) Nevertheless, the kind of help that computers can provide is very limited. (3) One point that deserves to be made is that the lack of women in mathematics is another statistical phenomenon. (4) If it happens that your problem, or more usually sub-problem, is one of the small minority that can be solved by a long and repetitive search, then well and good. (5) If, on the other hand, you are stuck and need a bright idea, then, in the present state of technology, a computer will be no help whatsoever.

【24~28】다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. 
Furniture is among the oldest engineering structures designed to carry a rather well-defined load under rather well-defined circumstances. We are not surprised that furniture used beyond its intended purpose is broken, and we readily blame the child who abuses the furniture rather than the designer of the furniture or the furniture itself when it is abused. Thus a chair must support a person in a sitting position, but it might not be expected to survive a fall from a tall building. A child’s bed might be expected to support a sleeping child, but it would not necessarily be considered badly designed if it collapsed under the child’s wild use of it as a trampoline. The arms and legs of chairs, the heads and feet of beds, just like those of the people whom they serve, cannot be expected to be __________ without limit.      *trampoline: (도약용) 놀이 기구
(1) comfortable 	(2) expensive 	(3) beautiful
(4) strong 	(5) heavy

25. 
A vendor in a city set up shop and sold doughnuts and coffee to passersby. During the breakfast and lunch hours, he always had long lines of customers waiting. He noticed that, as he was a one-man show, the biggest bottleneck preventing him from selling more doughnuts and coffee was the disproportionate amount of time it took to make change for his customers. Finally, he simply put a small basket on the side of his stand filled with dollar bills and coins. Most customers responded by being completely honest, often leaving him larger-than-normal tips. Also, he was able to move customers through at twice the pace because he did not have to make change. In addition, he found that his customers liked this idea and kept coming back. By ____________ in this way, he was able to double his sales.
(1) refusing change 	(2) extending trust
(3) using a new recipe 	(4) distributing samples
(5) making tips obligatory

26. 
Few things hold people back more than ____________. They do not ask for what they need because the answer may be no. They do not ask their boss for a raise or for more time off. They are afraid to be the first to say, “I love you.” They do not ask for help from people they do not know well. In short, they do not let their wants and needs be known because they are afraid of being turned away. But the wonderful truth is this: If you can accept NO for an answer, you can fearlessly ask for whatever you need. It is also true that you will not receive if you do not ask. So do not be afraid to ask! You may be surprised at the number of people willing to help. 
(1) the fear of rejection 	
(2) the loss of patience 
(3) the shortage of time 	
(4) the lack of knowledge 
(5) the excess of curiosity

27.  
Take a moment to cast your mind back over the past week or so, and think about something you regret. Was it something you did or something you failed to do? It seems that ____________. As an example, consider Mary and Laura, who invest their money in companies A and B. Mary invests in company A and considers switching to company B but she decides not to. Laura invests in company B and considers switching to company A and she decides to do so. They both find out that they would have been better off by $1,000 if they had taken different actions. Who do you think feels more regret? Most people judge that Laura will regret her action more than Mary will regret her inaction. 
(1) unplanned actions always give rise to regrets 
(2) people regret their actions more than their failures to act 
(3) people regret most when their relationship with others suffers 
(4) people feel satisfied when they make their own decisions 
(5) regret makes people take more profitable actions

28. [3점]
The spread of prosperity, the single-family home, the invention of television and computers have all made it possible for us to live private lives unimaginable to previous generations. We no longer live in close quarters with our neighbors, we can move about without crowding into buses or trains; we do not have to go to theaters or share our tastes with our neighbors. However, the same technologies that help separate us from the crowds also make it possible to monitor and record our behaviors. Although fewer people have intimate knowledge of our lives, many people — mostly unknown to us — know something about us. The very technology that was supposed to free us from mass society has turned out to be as much a fishbowl as an information highway. In modern society, we have discovered that ____________.
(1) people cannot use public transportation because of crowding
(2) technology makes us independent from natural environments
(3) more people become indifferent to the spread of prosperity
(4) cooperating with people leads to wrong conclusions
(5) being free often means also being naked

29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
  Efficiency means producing a specific end rapidly, with the (A) [least / most] amount of cost. The idea of efficiency is specific to the interests of the industry or business, but is typically advertised as a (B) [loss / benefit] to the customer. Examples are plentiful: the salad bars, filling your own cup, self-service gasoline, ATMs, microwave dinners and convenience stores which are different from the old-time groceries where you gave your order to the grocer. The interesting element here is that the customer often ends up doing the work that previously was done for them. And the customer ends up (C) [saving / spending] more time and being forced to learn new technologies, remember more numbers, and often pay higher prices in order for the business to operate more efficiently, or maintain a higher profit margin.

    (A)         (B)          (C)
(1) least  ……	loss 	…… saving
(2) least  ……	loss 	…… spending
(3) least  ……	benefit 	…… spending
(4) most  ……	loss 	…… saving
(5) most  ……	benefit 	…… spending

30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
  
The three pictures above represent a model of the effects of global warming on permafrost regions. Permafrost is frozen ground that remains at or below 0℃ for more than two years. Most of the world’s permafrost has been frozen for millennia, trapping massive amounts of carbon in organic material. In areas of extreme cold presented in Picture 1, permafrost is thousands of feet thick and lies (1) below a layer of soil a few feet deep called the active layer, which freezes and thaws with the seasons. Where the average annual air temperature is slightly below freezing, permafrost is (2) scattered as in Picture 2. Compared to Picture 1, the permafrost in Picture 2 is topped by a (3) shallower active layer. In Picture 3, in permafrost regions that now experience shorter, milder winters, the area of permafrost is (4) reduced further, compared to Picture 2. Carbon dioxide and methane are freed into the atmosphere and (5) more trees and plants grow as in Picture 3.     *thaw: 녹다




31. 다음 글에 드러난 'I'의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것은?
My mother gave me some strawberry jam to take to Mrs. Sampson. It was winter and, when she opened the door, I was overcome by the smell of the stove and the damp, dark atmosphere. I was afraid of Mrs. Sampson. She was a big woman with gray skin, like clay, with a couple of gray hairs sticking out of her chin. She always wore a dirty, mud-colored cardigan over shapeless dresses. Worst of all, she had bad breath! “Here you are, dear,” she said in her scratchy voice, and put a dollar bill in my hand, “but don’t spend it all at once!” I fled, back to the relative safety of my own home.
(1) calm 	(2) scared 	(3) angry
(4) cheerful 	(5) indifferent

32. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
American culture in general appears suspicious of leisure. Some people believe this may be due to the Protestant work ethic. Many Americans fill their free time with intellectually or physically demanding hobbies or volunteer work. Even on vacation, Americans stay in touch with the workplace via their cellular phones and laptop computers. ＿＿(A)＿＿, Europeans hold leisure in high regard. A new French law gave France the shortest work week in Europe. Companies with more than twenty employees are required to cut work hours from 39 to 35 per week. Besides creating more leisure time for workers, this move is expected to help ease unemployment. In Germany, ＿＿(B)＿＿, longer work weeks may soon be the standard. Its low birth rate has resulted in fewer workers supporting more and more retired Germans in the generous state welfare system.
      (A)                      (B)
(1) On the other hand 	…… therefore
(2) On the other hand 	…… however
(3) Likewise 		…… indeed
(4) Likewise 		…… however
(5) Nevertheless 	…… therefore

【33~34】다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. 
Growing native plants in a garden is catching on like wildfire. Natives often attract more birds and pollinators such as bees and butterflies, increasing their diversity to your garden. Imitating a native landscape in an isolated urban yard, however, does not do all that much to make up for lost native habitat. So what is the most ecological use of your garden? At the top of the list is gardening for your own food. There is no reason that what you plant for birds, butterflies, and bees cannot also feed you and your family. Sunflowers are often called ‘nature’s bird feeders,’ but you can plant enough to share the oil-rich seeds. Many fruit trees in your garden can also feed both birds and you.
*pollinator: 꽃가루받이를 하는 곤충
(1) uses of native plants in the wild as food suppliers 
(2) necessities of preserving the native landscapes 
(3) increasing diversity of wild plants in a garden
(4) growing food plants in a garden for humans and animals 
(5) ecological distinction between birds and pollinators

34. 다음 글에서 필자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Conditioning occurs indirectly, which adds to its impact on us. Let’s say, for example, that you watch another person get an electric shock. Each time, a signal light comes on before the shock is delivered. Even if you do not receive a shock yourself, you will soon develop an emotional response to the light. Children who learn to fear thunder by watching their parents react to it have undergone similar conditioning. If horror movies can affect us, we might expect the emotions of parents, friends, and relatives to have even more impact. How, for instance, does a city child learn to fear snakes and respond emotionally to mere pictures of them? Being told that “snakes are dangerous” may not explain the child’s emotional response. More likely, the child has observed others reacting fearfully to the word snake or to snake images on television.
(1) 언어가 감정 형성에 미치는 영향
(2) 성장 환경과 지적 발달의 상관 관계
(3) 타인의 반응을 통한 조건화의 형성
(4) 직접 경험을 통한 아동의 감정 변화
(5) 도시와 시골 아동의 조건화 과정 차이

35. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Travel around the country with Carl Sandburg, a twentieth-century poet who has been called the voice of America. Hop aboard his poetry train on which each amazing poem leads to a different destination —some quiet and peaceful, others alive with enthusiasm and humor. Visit rural back roads and busy cities, and meet friendly animals and ordinary people going about their daily lives. More than thirty wonderful poems are presented in this collection of his poetry, along with special illustrations that capture the spirit of the poetry. With a magic touch, Sandburg manages to find the laughter and meaning in everyday things — doors, rain, colors, the sea, a telephone wire, words, and even a rat! So pack your imagination and get ready to take a special trip with the words of Carl Sandburg.
(1) 창작시 공모를 광고하려고
(2) 여행의 중요성을 강조하려고
(3) 기행문 쓰는 방법을 설명하려고
(4) 시집을 소개하여 읽기를 권하려고
(5) 미국의 다양한 작가들을 소개하려고





36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
  The above diagram shows the average retention rate of learning after 24 hours for various instructional methods which are categorized into different processing types. (1) The percentage of average retention increases from the top to the bottom of the pyramid. (2) At the top of the pyramid is Lecture which results in an average retention of 5%, followed by Reading that yields 10% average retention. (3) Regarding the Verbal and Visual Processing type, the average percentage of retention increases from Audiovisual to Demonstration to Discussion Group. (4) The instructional methods, Practice by Doing and Teach Others / Immediate Use of Learning, belonging to the processing type of Doing, result in 75% and 90% average retention, respectively. (5) The average retention rate of Teach Others / Immediate Use of Learning is four times that of Demonstration.    *retention: 기억 보유력


37. The barrier at the River Scheldt에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The barrier at the River Scheldt in the Netherlands is the world’s largest tidal surge barrier. It protects Zeeland from the constant threat of flooding. Completed in 1987, it forms part of the Delta Project, a line of massive sea-defenses, which was constructed after disastrous floods in 1953. As originally planned, the barrier was to be a solid dam that, by drastically restricting tidal flows, would have destroyed much of the marine environment on the Eastern Scheldt. In 1973, however, a campaign forced the project to be suspended. The project was revived four years later in a new and greatly modified form. Instead of being permanently sealed, the redesigned barrier is now normally open to the tides, restricting their flow by only 25 percent. It is only when water levels reach 3 meters above normal that steel gates close shut, holding back even the most extreme waters.   *surge: 범람
(1) 1953년에 일어난 홍수 피해를 줄이는 데 도움이 되었다.
(2) 조수의 흐름을 완전히 막아 해양 생태계에 큰 피해를 야기했다.
(3) 건설 사업이 중단된 지 5년 후 재개되었다.
(4) 재설계되어 평상시에는 조수의 흐름을 절반만 제한한다.
(5) 물이 특정 수위에 이를 때 수문이 닫힌다.


38. precocial birds에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The young of precocial birds belonging to the same clutch have a strong incentive to hatch as close together in time as possible. The mother and the first-hatched young will be on the move within hours; chicks left behind in the eggs will die. When the eggs of these species are incubated separately, the hatching times are spread over a period of days; but when they are kept together, hatching times are close by, within one or two hours. This coordinated hatching is achieved by sound signals exchanged by the chicks while they are still in the eggs. The most characteristic sound is a regular loud click, which is most persistent just prior to hatching. It is not caused by a tapping against the shell, but is a vocalization associated with breathing movements.
*precocial: 부화 후 곧 활동하는
**clutch 한배의 새끼들
(1) 한 배의 새끼들은 가능한 한 서로 가까운 시간에 부화하려는 강한 동기가 있다.
(2) 어미와 먼저 부화한 새끼들은 수 시간 내에 이동한다.
(3) 알들이 서로 멀어져 부화할 때, 부화는 며칠에 걸쳐 일어난다.
(4) 새끼들은 알 속에서 소리 신호들을 주고 받는다.
(5) 가장 특징적인 소리는 껍데기를 두드려 내는 것이다.



【39~40】다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. 
We know where we are headed and what we want to do. However, quite often, due to forces outside our control, things do not go as we had planned and we have to adjust to a postponement or create a whole new set of circumstances. This is what happens when life throws us a curveball. The fact is that life is unpredictable. For example, your car breaks down and you are late for an appointment. While it is true that you never arrive at that important meeting, you end up spending a few relaxing hours with people you would never have met otherwise. Remember that not only are curveballs the universe’s way of keeping us awake —which is a gift in and of itself — but they are also its method of bringing us wonderful surprises.
(1) 스포츠는 때때로 삶에 활력을 가져다준다.
(2) 삶에서의 절제는 자신의 의지에 달려 있다.
(3) 삶의 예측 불가능성은 긍정적으로 작용할 수 있다.
(4) 현실에 안주하는 것은 실패의 원인이 될 수 있다.
(5) 계획한 대로 삶을 살아가려는 노력이 필요하다.



40. 
When my son was seven years old, we went to a dolphin show. After the show, I went up to the trainer and asked, “How did you get the dolphin to do all these really neat things?” The trainer looked at my son and me and said, “Unlike many parents, whenever the dolphin does anything like what I want him to do, I notice him! I give him a hug and a fish.” The light went on in my head. Whenever my son did what I wanted him to do, I paid little attention to him. However, when he did not, I gave him a lot of attention because I did not want to raise a bad kid! I was unintentionally teaching him to be a little monster in order to get my attention. Since that day, I have tried hard to notice my son’s good acts and downplay his mistakes.
(1) 아이는 부모의 행동을 관찰하여 모방하려고 한다.
(2) 아이의 잘못보다 바른 행동에 더 관심을 기울여야 한다.
(3) 아이와 함께 하는 시간이 많을수록 긍정적인 영향을 준다.
(4) 아이가 동물의 행동을 관찰하는 것은 교육적 효과가 있다.
(5) 잘못된 행동을 하는 아이는 지속적인 관찰이 필요하다.

41. 주어진 글에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

A man was diagnosed with a terminal illness and given six months to live. In his last few days, he said that he had done more in the past months than in his entire life. Remember that life has a deadline; we just do not know when it is. So let’s get one!

(A) This decreasing number is a constant reminder to motivate you to take action to live your life, today. You trade each day of your life for what you do in that day. Make a good trade!
(B) What you have is the number of days that you have left to live. Write this number down, and every morning cross it out and write the new number, which is one day less.
(C) We are going to do some calculations to find out how much longer you have to live. Start with the number 79, the average life expectancy. Now, subtract your current age. Multiply that number by 365.
(1) (A) - (B) - (C)	(2) (A) - (C) - (B)
(3) (B) - (A) - (C)   	(4) (B) - (C) - (A)
(5) (C) - (B) - (A)


【42~43】다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
42. 
The person who wrote of a building bringing gladness to the viewer reminds us of the importance of beauty in human life. Biologists account for the human desire for art in other terms. They explain that human beings have very large brains that demand stimulation. Curious, active, and inventive, we humans constantly explore, and in so doing invent things that appeal to our senses — fine arts, fine food, fine scents, and fine music. Art has mostly been considered in terms of seeking beauty, but there are other reasons deeply rooted in the human experience that create needs for art. For one, humans also reflect on the nature of things and the meaning of life. Visually and verbally, we constantly communicate with each other; in our need to understand and our need to communicate, the arts serve a vital function.
(1) Verbal vs. Non-verbal Communication 
(2) Societal Roles of Inventions
(3) Why Do Humans Need Art?
(4) Visual Stimulation to Human Brains
(5) What Is the Best Way to Enjoy Fine Food?




43. 
It is possible to observe a basic and sometimes unexplainable division in the animal world. Some species crowd together and require physical contact with each other. Others avoid touching. No apparent logic governs the category into which a species falls. Curiously enough, closely related animals may belong to different categories. The great Emperor penguin is a contact species. It conserves heat through contact with its fellows in large groups. The smaller Adelie penguin is a non-contact species. Thus it is somewhat less adaptable to cold than the Emperor. Other functions served by contact behavior are unknown. One could guess that, since contact animals are more ‘involved’ with each other, their social organization and possibly their manner of exploiting the environment might be different from those of non-contact animals.
(1) Dangers Caused by Cold to Some Animal Species 
(2) Conflicts Between Contact and Non-contact Species
(3) Relationship Between Temperature and Animal Survival 
(4) Reproduction Patterns of Different Animal Species 
(5) Categorization of Animals by Their Contact Behaviors


44. 글의 흐름으로 보아 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

But the strong pig can race to the dispenser and push the weak pig aside to claim the leftovers.

Consider the following experiment with a strong and a weak pig. Two pigs are kept in a box with a lever at one end and a food dispenser at the other. When the lever is pushed, food appears at the dispenser. ( (1) ) If the weak pig pushes the lever, the strong pig waits by the dispenser and eats all the food. ( (2) ) Even if the weak pig races to the dispenser before the food is gone, the strong pig pushes the weak pig away. ( (3) ) The weak pig realizes this, so it never pushes the lever first. ( (4) ) On the other hand, if the strong pig pushes the lever, the weak pig waits by the dispenser and eats most of the food. ( (5) ) This makes it worthwhile for the strong pig to push the lever. The outcome is that the strong pig does all the work and the weak pig does most of the eating.  *dispenser: 일정량을 배분해 주는 장치

45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
 The face of the water, in time, became a wonderful book — a book that was a dead language to the uneducated passenger, but which told its mind to the pilot without reserve, delivering its most cherished secrets as clearly as if it spoke them with a voice. The passenger who could not read this book saw nothing but all manner of pretty pictures in it, painted by the sun and shaded by the clouds. To the pilot, however, it was a highlighted passage. Indeed, it was more than that; for it meant that a wreck or a rock was buried there that could tear the life out of the strongest vessel that ever floated. It is the faintest and simplest expression the water ever makes, and the most frightening to a pilot’s eye.     *pilot: 수로 안내인   

▶ To the passenger, the face of the water reflects ＿＿(A)＿＿ whereas to the pilot it reveals ＿＿(B)＿＿.

    (A)               (B)
(1) beauty 	…… pleasure
(2) beauty 	…… danger
(3) anxiety 	…… pleasure
(4) anxiety 	…… danger
(5) fright 	…… pleasure


【46~47】다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
  As we explore together the virtual world that floats on the edge of this material life, the many imaginative territories you inhabit bring back another reality. I catch images of my own childhood wanderings through Narnia, the land of hobbits, and Mowgli’s jungle. All these are deep pleasures which combine all my senses and momentarily transport me into another dimension of living.
  If I were to bring it all together I would say that among all the misery, fear, injustice, and pain, I hope you will not forget moments when all this fades away into periods of innocent joy. It is when we bring all our powerful senses together, perhaps in a moment in the garden of earthly delights that we ＿＿＿＿＿ over despair.
  So the moment when you dance to Handel or when you sit in a pool of wild flowers, or gravely take part in your first tea ceremony, these are the moments you will treasure. They are, with similar moments with friends and loved ones, what makes being human bearable.       *hobbit: Tolkien 작품에 나오는 등장인물

46. 밑줄 친 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) deliberate 	(2) triumph 	(3) watch
(4) argue 	(5) grieve

47. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?	
(1) Negative Aspects of Innocent Joy
(2) Unpleasant Places Visited in Childhood
(3) Gaining Strength from Pleasurable Memories
(4) Overlooking Injustices in a Fantasy World
(5) Playing Games in Virtual Reality








【48~50】다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
  When I first began teaching, I was invited to a workshop for new professors. Like most people who teach at universities, I had spent a long time learning what to teach, but none learning how to teach it. Somehow, my university seemed to hope, a weekend spent with experienced professors would make up for that. My colleagues presented well-crafted lectures about the tools they used in the classroom. I enjoyed their presentations, but do not remember a thing they said.
(B)
  When we were called to the next talk, he put down his cup and I noticed there was not a trace of coffee in it. I thought that was rather odd, and said so. “My doctor told me to stop drinking coffee,” he explained. “So I have always used an empty cup. Doesn’t make any difference.” I decided to try his idea in my class, but not with an empty cup.
(C)
  I took a cup of coffee with me to my next class Monday morning. It helped. My pauses, as I drank the coffee, not only gave my students time to think about what I had said, but gave me time to think about what I was going to say next. I began to use my pauses to look around the room to see how my students were reacting to what I had just said. When I saw their attention wander, I tried to bring them back. When I saw them puzzled over some concept that I thought I had explained, I gave another example. My lectures became less organized and less brilliant, but my students seemed to understand me better.
(D)
  One thing that I do remember happened at a coffee break. Finding myself alone, I turned to a mathematics professor standing nearby. I asked him what his favorite teaching tool was. “A cup of coffee,” he said. I asked him how he used it. “Well,” he said, “I talk too much and too fast in the classroom. Students sometimes have trouble following me. So every once in a while, when I’ve said something I want my students to think about, I stop and take a sip of coffee. It lets what I’ve just said sink in.”


48. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) (B)-(D)-(C)      	(2) (C)-(B)-(D)
(3) (C)-(D)-(B)      	(4) (D)-(B)-(C)
(5) (D)-(C)-(B)



49. 위 글의 밑줄 친 a[A] cup of coffee의 역할로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) 강의 및 학습을 돕는 도구
(2) 수업 중 졸음을 방지하는 수단
(3) 학생들 간의 친목을 도모하는 수단
(4) 학습 과제를 제시하는 수단
(5) 관찰력을 향상시키는 도구



50. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
(1) 필자는 신임 교수를 위한 워크숍에 참석했다.
(2) 수학 교수는 의사의 권유에 따라 커피를 마시지 않았다.
(3) 필자는 월요일 아침 수업 시간에 커피를 마셨다.
(4) 필자는 휴식 시간에 수학 교수와 이야기하였다.
(5) 수학 교수는 수업 시간에 자신의 말이 너무 느리다고 생각한다.

2009년 수능

1.  대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 야외용 식탁을 고르시오. 

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
(1) frustrated	(2) jealous	(3) indifferent
(4) satisfied	(5) grateful


3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. 
(1) 설사약	(2) 멀미약	(3) 항생제
(4) 소화제	(5) 구충제


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
(1) 환영 표지판 만들기	 공항에 마중 나가기
 집에 친구 초대하기	(4) 자매 학교 방문하기
 시내 관광 시켜주기


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
(1) $180	(2) $190		(3) $220	
(4) $250	(5) $290


6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) 새로 개관한 공연장을 홍보하려고
(2) 공연장 놀이방 운영을 공지하려고
(3) 공연 장소 변경에 대해 사과하려고
(4) 공연장 내 질서 유지를 당부하려고
 공연장 물품 보관소에 대해 안내하려고

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오. 
(1) to replace the old bed with a new one
(2) to order a heater from the Internet
(3) to set the room temperature higher
(4) to buy an electric blanket
(5) to go shopping together

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
(1) 학교 방송실	(2) 신문사 편집실	(3) 광고사 기획실
(4) 119 상황실	(5) 도서관 휴게실

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
(1) 보안요원—가수	(2) 스턴트맨—분장사
(3) 운동선수—트레이너	(4) 영화감독—시나리오 작가
(5) 건축 설계사—건물주

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
 마술 배우기	 노래 부르기
 새장 준비하기	 마술 의상 빌려오기 
 마술 클럽 가입하기

11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 공연을 관람하게 될 날짜를 고르시오.

12. World Tea Championship에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
(1) 녹차를 포함하여 세 부문에서 경쟁이 이루어진다. 
(2) 예선에서 15개국을 대표하는 참가자들이 경쟁했다. 
(3) 결선에서의 심사 기준은 색, 향, 맛이다. 
(4) 결선 심사는 이전 우승자들이 담당한다. 
 결선 진출자들에게 Tea Master 칭호를 부여한다. 
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
 
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:__________________________________________
(1) I think so. My uncle likes the game, too.
(2) All right, I’'ll go to the website right now.
(3) Not really. The package will arrive in time
(4) It’s my fault, I wish I hadn't returned the game.
(5) I agree. We shouldn’t download games illegally.

15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:________________________________________   __ 
(1) Well done! I’ll buy you another monitor after work.
(2) Calm down. You can rewrite the report tomorrow.
(3) That’s incredible! The program is so easy to use.
(4) Thanks for the tip. I’ll go see if I can use it.
(5) What a pity! I won’t back it up next time. 

16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Woman:__________________________________________
(1) Not at all. It’s my pleasure to help you out.
(2) I’m afraid it’s too late to make a reservation
(3) I think taking the train will be better for me.
(4) It’s OK. We’ll get there in about half an hour.
(5) I don’t think so. I planned to meet my friend here.

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, 아버지가 Julie에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Julie’s father:______________________________________
(1) Be happy. At least you’re healthy.
(2) Cheer up. Let's take it to another hospital.
(3) I’m sorry. There’s nothing we can do anyway.
(4) That’s too bad. I've always liked cats better anyway.
(5) Don’t worry. There are six other puppies to play with.

  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This, in the simplest definition, is a promise enforceable by law. The promise may be to do something or to stop from doing something. The making of this requires the mutual agreement of two or more persons or parties, one of them ordinarily making an offer and another accepting, If one of the parties fails to keep the promise, the other has rights to compensation. The law about this considers such questions as whether this exists, what the meaning of this is, whether this has been broken, and what compensation is due to the injured party.
(1) 계약     (2) 고소     (3) 의회     (4) 신용	    (5) 선거

19. 밑줄 친 He[he]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
It was a beautiful Friday afternoon and the weekend was about to begin, but Rob had a lot on his mind. (1)He had been putting off doing his chemistry report which was due on Monday. After borrowing some books from the library, he went home. Later that evening, (2)he was doing the assignment when his father came in. “What are you doing, kid?” he asked. “Biography of Marie Curie,” Rob said absently as (3)he was typing on his computer. “Really? I did that for a chemistry assignment when I was in school,” his father said. “Why don’t you find some information from the encyclopedia over there?” (4)he added. Rob grabbed the encyclopedia. He smiled thinking that even though he was practically born playing computer games, (5)he was still doing the same assignments his father did over 20 years ago.
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Upon receiving your last letter, I rushed to look up the word 'flattering' in the dictionary, I was shocked to find out that it could imply something negative, which I certainly did not mean. I should have used some wordlike 'complimentary' instead. For that, I would like to ask for the kindness in your heart to forgive my unintended offense. If you knew me well, you would know that I am shameless enough to take all compliments at their face value and not to think that they might be mere flattery. I just did not know what the word really implied, I hope that you no longer feel hurt or uncomfortable in any way as a result of our correspondence.
(1) 무례한 태도에 대하여 항의하려고
(2) 훌륭하게 쓰여진 편지를 칭찬하려고
(3) 단어를 잘못 사용한 것에 대하여 사과하려고
(4) 전문 용어에 대한 정확한 의미를 문의하려고
(5) 좋은 사전을 선물해 준 것에 대하여 감사하려고
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
While awaiting the birth of a new baby, North American parents typically furnish a room as the infant’s sleeping quarters. For decades, child-rearing advice from experts has (A) encouraged / been encouraged the nighttime separation of baby from parent. For example, a study recommends that babies be moved into their own room by three months of age. “By six months a child (B) who / whom regularly sleeps in her parents’ room is likely to become dependent on this arrangement,” reports the study. Yet parent-infant ‘co-sleeping’ is the norm for approximately 90 percent of the world’s population. Cultures as (C) diverse / diversely as the Japanese, the Guatemalan Maya, and the Inuit of Northwestern Canada practice it. 
   (A) 			    		 (B)		  (C)
(1) encouraged	    	……	who		  ……		diverse
(2) encouraged	    	……	whom	  ……		diversely
(3) encouraged	    	……	who		  ……		diversely
(4) been encouraged  	……	who		  ……		diverse
(5) been encouraged 	……	whom	  ……		diverse

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
While manned space missions are more costly than unmanned (1) ones, they are more successful. Robots and astronauts use (2) much of the same equipment in space. But a human is much more capable of operating those instruments correctly and (3) to place them in appropriate and useful positions. Rarely (4) is a computer more sensitive and accurate than a human in managing the same geographical or environmental factors. Robots are also not equipped with capabilities like humans to solve problems (5) as they arise, and they often collect data that are unhelpful or irrelevant.

23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Most of you experience urges when trying to break a habit and these can be hard to resist unless you find something else to do instead, and best of all, something that uses the same part of the body - even the same muscles. (1) If the habit involves your hands, as when pulling out hair, then try to occupy them in some other way. (2) Playing with a toy or opening and closing your fists for a couple of minutes might be an answer. (3) The habit of scratching can be replaced with rubbing in some lotion or patting with the palm of the hand. (4) If the itches, however, do not disappear, stop scratching and take the medicine. (5) One 35-year-o1d woman who used to rub her eyes with her hands until they became sore and infected found it helpful to put on make-up when she was tempted to rub.
[24~27]다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

24.  In this modem world, People are not used to living with discomfort. We expect immediate results and satisfaction. We want answers faster than they can be delivered. There is twenty-four-hour repair and round-the-clock shopping. If we are hungry, there is always food available, from microwave dinners to all-night grocery stores and restaurants. People no longer know how to wait, or even what waiting means, It is nice to have what you want when you want it, but the ability to delay satisfaction is important.           is clearly an important virtue, yet so many people stand in front of their microwaves thinking “Hurry up!”
(1) Ambition        (2) Patience 			  (3) Honesty
(4) Modesty         (5) Diligence

25.  The goal of medicine as it is currently practiced is to develop procedures and drugs that work equally well on all patients, regardless of gender, age, or genetics, It derives from the prevalent belief that all of us are similar bio-mechanical units that rolled off the same assembly line - a most imperfect conception of human beings that limits conventional medicine's effectiveness. The doctor of the future, however, needs to practice medicine in fundamentally different ways. One of the most important shifts will be an increased recognition of             , a concept now largely ignored. Instead of treating different patients that display similar symptoms with the same drugs, doctors should identify root causes of disease to come up with a personalized treatment.
(1) group therapy 	(2) patient individuality 
(3) medical technology 	(4) doctors' qualifications 
(5) wonder drugs

26.   For the most part, we like things that are familiar to us. To prove the point to yourself, try a little experiment. Get the negative of an old photograph that shows a front view of your face and have it developed into a pair of pictures one that shows you as you actually look and one that shows a reverse image so that the right and left sides of your face are interchanged. Now decide which version of your face you like better and ask a good friend to make the choice, too. If you are like most people, you should notice something odd: Your friend will prefer the true print, but you will prefer the reverse image. Why? Because you both will be responding favorably to the more familiar face - your friend to              and you to the reversed one you find in the mirror every day. [3점] 
                                 * negative: [사진] 원판(1) his own true face
(2) other people's faces
(3) the one the world sees
(4) the negative of his own face
(5) the one more recently photographed

27.   The human auditory system               . A psychologist named Richard Warren demonstrated this particularly well. He recorded a sentence and cut out apiece of the sentence from the recording tape. He replaced the missing piece with a burst of static of the same duration. Nearly everyone who heard the altered recording could report that they heard both a sentence and static. But a majority of people could not tell where the static was! The auditory system had filled in the missing speech information, so that the sentence seemed uninterrupted. Most people reported that there was static and that it existed apart from the spoken sentence. The static and the sentence formed separate perceptual streams due to differences in the quality of sound that caused them to group separately.                      * static: 잡음(雜音)
(1) recognizes incorrect pronunciation
(2) plays an important role in speaking
(3) has its own version of perceptual completion
(4) reacts differently according to different languages
(5) analyzes auditory and visual cues at the same time

28.   Not all authors trusted that the theater audience would automatically understand their plays in the intended manner. Thus, they repeatedly attempted to make it clear to their public that visiting the theater was not merely for the purpose of entertainment, but rather to draw lessons from the play offered onstage. It was, therefore, important for the viewer                so as to facilitate interpretation of the content. This idea was developed by Bertolt Brecht with his ‘epic theater,’ which used alienation as a strategy to prevent the identification of the public with the figures of the drama. Through scattered narration and commentary throughout the play, for example, the viewers are invited to take a step back from the performance. In this way, they are given hints to better understand the play while the conclusion is left open so as to leave them to draw their own conclusions.  [3점]
(1) to imitate the actor's performance
(2) to learn about the play beforehand 
(3) to identify himself with the actors on the stage
(4) to bridge the gap between himself and the actors
(5) to create a distance from the actions on the stage

29.  다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
After dinner he built a fire, going out into the weather for wood he had piled against the garage. The air was bright and cold against his face, and the snow in the driveway was already halfway to his knees. He gathered logs, shaking off their soft white caps and carrying them inside. He sat for a time in front of the fireplace, cross-legged, adding logs, and gazing at the warm fire. Outside, snow continued to fall quietly in the cones of light cast by the streetlights. By the time he rose and looked out the window, his car had become a soft white hill on the edge of the street.
(1) calm and peaceful 	(2) lively and festive
(3) funny and amusing 	(4) exciting and thrilling
(5) promising and hopeful 


30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? 

Figures A and B demonstrate how dew point is measured by a dew point hygrometer. In Figure A, light is transmitted from a laser and (1) reflected off the mirror onto a receiver that measures the intensity of the observed light. When the mirror temperature is above dew point and the intensity of the transmitted light is 10 mW/cm2, the intensity of the observed light is (2) the same . In Figure B, when the mirror temperature is at dew point, dew drops cover the (3) surface of the mirror. When the transmitted light hits the dew drops, it becomes (4) scattered. As a consequence, compared to the intensity of the transmitted light, that of the observed light measured by the receiver is (5) increased.
    * hygrometer: 습도계 ** mW/cm2 : 빛의 세기 단위

31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Responses to survey questions are influenced by events, and we should consider this when reviewing the results of a survey. The reputation of an airline, for example, will be (A) damaged / recovered if a survey is conducted just after a plane crash. A computer company lost its reputation in company surveys just after major news coverage about a defect in its products. On the positive side, surveys by a beverage company about its image showed very (B) hostile / favorable public attitudes just after its massive investment in the Olympics. Consequently, surveys should be conducted when the organization is not in the news or connected to a significant event that may influence public opinion. In neutral context, a more (C) valid / biased survey can be conducted about an organization’s reputation, products, or services.
  (A) 			    	 (B)		  	(C)
(1) damaged	    	……	hostile		  ……	biased
(2) damaged	    	……	hostile	  		……	valid
(3) damaged	    	……	favorable		……	valid
(4) recovered 	……	hostile		  ……	biased
(5) recovered 	……	favorable	  ……	valid
32. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
War seems to be part of the history of humanity. Countries, regions, and even villages were economically independent of one another in the past. Under those circumstances, the destruction of our enemy might have been a victory for us. There was a relevance to violence and war.   (A)  , today we are so interdependent that the concept of war has become outdated. When we face problems or disagreements today, we have to arrive at solutions through dialog. We must work to resolve conflicts in a spirit of reconciliation and always keep in mind the interests of others. We cannot destroy our neighbors! We cannot ignore their interests! Doing so would ultimately cause us to suffer.   (B)  , the concept of violence is now unsuitable, and nonviolence is the appropriate method.
     (A)		       (B)
(1)However  	……			Otherwise
(2)However		……			Therefore
(3)Nonetheless	……			Otherwise
(4)Similarly		……			Therefore
(5)Similarly		……			In contrast

[33~34]다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. Imagine that you are in a meeting. Your party and the other party are sitting across a table. You ask a question on a particular subject and the answer is unsatisfactory. What would be the best response? It is none at all. So if you are seeking more information or a different kind of information, ask for it by remaining silent. When there is a long pause in the conversation, people feel an overwhelming need to fill it. If someone has finished speaking and you do not play along by taking up your end of the dialog, that person will automatically start to elaborate. Eventually, they may say what you want to hear.
(1) 의견 교환 시 대화 예절의 중요성
(2) 대화를 통한 창의적 사고 신장의 필요성
(3) 바람직한 대화를 위한 적극적 태도의 필요성
(4) 회의의 효율적 진행을 위한 사회자의 중요성
(5) 만족스러운 답변을 얻기 위한 침묵의 효용성

34. A forest fire in Brazil affects the weather in Moscow by creating huge dust clouds that eventually float over Russia. Every element in an ecosystem depends on every other element, even the so-called nonliving elements such as minerals, oxygen, and sunlight. Yes, light is an integral element of all life. The sun is food for many of earth’s life forms. Physicists speak of photons of light as being interchangeable. When the light from an object hits a person, only some of it bounces off. Most of the photons are absorbed into the person. Its energy becomes that person’s energy. This is how incredible interdependence is everything is constantly becoming everything else.			 * photon: 광자(光子)
(1) the connectedness of elements in nature
(2) the importance of light as a food source
(3) the effects of forest fires on the environment
(4) the causes of dramatic changes in the weather
(5) the consequences of the destruction of ecosystems

35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?

The graph above shows the growth rate of total output in the U.S. from 1960 to 1999. The growth rate of total output is equal to the growth rate in the number of hours worked plus the growth rate of labor productivity. (1) The 1960-1969 period displayed the highest growth rate of total output of all the periods in the graph. (2) The growth rate of total output declined from the 1960-1969  period to the 1980-1989 period. (3) The only period where the growth rate in the number of hours worked exceeded the labor productivity growth rate was the 1980 1989 period. (4) The 1990-1994 period showed an increase in the growth rate of total output from the 1980-1989 period. (5) The 1995-1999 period displayed the second highest growth rate of total output and the greatest labor productivity growth rate of all the time periods.

36.  다음 글에서 smallmouth bass에 관한 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Like its largemouth cousin, the smallmouth bass is a native of the Mississippi drainage, which makes it a true heartland fish. Whereas the largemouth likes slow or still water with lots of food-holding weeds, the smallmouth prefers clean, rocky bottoms and swifter water, ideally in the range of 65° to 68°F. In waters warmer than 73°F, you can forget about finding one. In lakes, smallmouth often school up, which means that if you catch one, you can catch a bunch. In rivers and streams, they are more solitary. The smallmouth has a series of dark vertical bands along its sides. The dorsal fin is one continuous fin (as opposed to the separated dorsal fin of the largemouth).				* dorsal fin: 등지느러미
(1) Mississippi강으로 유입된 외래종이다. 
(2) 물의 흐름이 느린 곳을 좋아한다. 
(3) 73℉ 이상의 물에서 쉽게 찾아 볼 수 있다. 
(4) 호수보다 강에서 떼를 지어 다닌다. 
(5) 몸통의 옆면에는 거무스름한 띠들이 있다. 
37. Chattanooga에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? 
Starting in the 1960s, People began flooding into Chattanooga, a former factory town, to explore its caves, rivers, and cliffs. Before long more than 3,800 caves surrounding the city had been discovered. The nearby Ocoee was among the most paddled rivers in the country and six major climbing sites sprang up within an hour’s drive of city limits. But in spite of this boundless outdoors potential, there remained the problem of Chattanooga proper, a post-industrial wasteland that made the city the kind of place you would visit but would never want to live in. Not, that is, until lately. Over the past decade, Chattanooga has made an incredible urban come back: electric buses, organic markets, and a 120-million-dollar riverfront restoration project completed last year. In addition, beautiful modem architecture such as the post-modem museum and the newly remodeled aquarium plays a big role in the comeback of Chattanooga.
(1) 강, 절벽 등을 탐험하기 위해 1960년대부터 사람들이 몰려들었다. 
(2) 주변에서 3,800개 이상의 동굴들이 발견되었다. 
(3) 주요 등반 장소가 도시 경계에서 차로 한 시간 이내의 거리에 생겼다. 
(4) 강변지역 복구사업은 일억 이천만 달러를 들여 진행되고 있다. 
(5) 현대식 건축물들이 도시의 모습을 되찾는 데 큰 역할을 하고 있다. 

[38~39]다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. In practical situations where there is no room for error, we have learned to avoid vagueness in communication. A fire chief, for example, needs to issue his orders with absolute clarity. In imaginative situations, however, there is the danger that too much specificity can limit your imagination. Let’s suppose that the same fire chief has asked you to paint a picture on the side of his firehouse. If he tells you what he wants it to look like right down to the last detail, he has not given you any room for your imagination. However, if the assignment were stated somewhat vaguely, then you would have more room to think and be more creative.
(1) 소방관들은 업무 수행 시 정확한 의사소통이 필요하다. 
(2) 상사는 부하의 업무에 지나치게 간섭하지 않는 것이 좋다. 
(3) 정확한 정보 해석을 위해서 여러 가능성을 고려해야 한다. 
(4) 대화에서는 애매한 표현을 사용하지 않는 것이 바람직하다. 
(5) 상상력이 필요한 상황에서는 다소 모호한 말이 도움이 될 수 있다. 

39. Although a speech can be effective, all the words in the world cannot measure up to the example of a leader, especially in communicating new behaviors and values. There is often no more effective way to help people understand the message than to have it modeled for them by the manager. Words can yield a variety of interpretations in terms of the kind of behaviors people think they mean. But a manager’s actions provide a clear model of exactly the kind of behavior required. Managers who want people to take a more team-based approach with their people, for example, will almost certainly get better results by taking a more team-based approach themselves rather than just by making a speech on teamwork.
(1) Old habits die hard.
(2) Time waits for no man.
(3) Two heads are better than one.
(4) Actions speak louder than words.
(5) A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.


40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은? 
However, now that the economy is characterized more by the exchange of information than by hard goods, geographical centrality has been replaced by attempts to create a sense of cultural centrality.

Now, as always, cities are desperate to create the impression that they lie at the center of something or other. ( (1) ) This idea of centrality may be locational, namely that a city lies at the geographical center of England, Europe, and so on. ( (2) ) This draws on a well-established notion that geographical centrality makes a place more accessible, easing communication and communication costs. ( (3) ) Cultural centrality usually demonstrates itself as a cry that a city is at the center of the action. ( (4) ) This means that the city has an abundance of cultural activities, such as restaurants, theater, ballet, music, sport, and scenery. ( (5) ) The suggestion is that people will want for nothing in this city.



[41~42]다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
41. Young children rarely think of their art as personal property. Often they throw it away or give it away. This suggests that much of the value of art for a child consists in making it. Interestingly, art in tribal societies is frequently abandoned after it has served its purpose. The focus is on the magical, expressive, and social value of the act of making. Some contemporary artists share this feeling, but they are also caught up in the system of art exhibition, the selling of their art, and the requirements of an art market. This results in a tension in the art world that is largely unresolved -1he tension between art as a satisfying mode of expression and art as a precious collectible object, between the experience of making and the experience of owning. 
(1) Art in Tribal Societies
(2) Conflicting Views on Art
(3) Traditional vs. Contemporary Art
(4) Using Art for Children's Education
(5) Modem Art Museums: Magical Places
42. The age of 3 is not without its charm. One of the more amusing aspects of this age is the child’s often vivid imagination, expressed most strikingly in his enjoyment of imaginary companions. Though some people have felt that only the lonely play with imaginary playmates, our research makes it very evident that it is often the highly superior and imaginative child who invents these creatures. They are very real to him, very important, and, we can assure you, quite harmless. Even though it may be annoying to have to lay a place at dinner or keep an extra seat in the family automobile for his ‘friend’ who exists only in your child's imagination, it is probably well worthwhile.
(1) Making New Friends at School
(2) Be a Role Model for Your Child
(3) How Can You Make Your Child Creative?
(4) Child's Imaginary Friend: Need for Worry?
(5) Various Aspects of Children's Imagination







43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Rosalyn’s parents did everything possible to avoid favoring one child over the others, and this resulted in her feelings being hurt. One year Rosalyn asked her mother to prepare a special treat for her birthday: the honey cake that Rosalyn had always loved.	

(A) Upon receiving the cake, Rosalyn became disappointed. It was, after all, her birthday; couldn't she be singled out on one day of the year? A parent’s admirable efforts not to play favorites can mean that no child gets the whole cake of parental love.
(B) Her mother said she couldn't. If she made a honey cake for Rosalyn, she’d have to make cakes for Rosalyn’s two sisters, and she didn't have time to make three cakes.
(C) In the end, her mother did give Rosalyn a honey cake on her birthday - a really small one, because she split the batter for one cake into three parts, to treat her daughters equally.               
                                      * batter: 반죽

(1) (A)-(C)-(B)   (2) (B)-(A)-(C)	   (3) (B)-(C)-(A)	
(4) (C)-(A)-(B)   (5) (C)-(B)-(A)
44. 다음 글의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
How can you create closeness when the two of you are hundreds of miles apart? How can you make the person you are talking to on the phone feel special when you cannot pat their back or give them a little hug? The answer is simple. Just use your caller's name far more often than you would in person, In fact, shower your conversations with his or her name. Saying a person's name too often in face-to-face conversation sounds manipulative. However, on the phone the effect is dramatically different. If you heard someone say your name, even if you were being pushed around in a big noisy crowd, you would pay attention and listen.
(1) 멀리 사는 친구와의 우정을 위해 가끔씩 전화해라.
(2) 대화 중에는 상대의 몸짓에 나타나는 의미를 잘 살펴라.
(3) 공공장소에서는 너무 큰 소리로 전화 통화를 하지 마라.
(4) 시끄러운 장소에서 친구와 대화할 때는 평소보다 천천히 말해라.
(5) 전화통화에서 친밀감을 주려면 상대의 이름을 자주 불러주어라.

45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many years ago, psychologists performed an experiment in which they put a number of people in a room, alone except for a ring toss set. It was one of those children’s toys with a short wooden post held upright on the floor and a bunch of round rings. The subjects were left alone to amuse themselves as best they could. As expected, with time to kill, they began trying to toss the rings around the post. What the psychologists discovered was that most of the people moved far enough away from the post so that tossing the rings around it was challenging but not so difficult as to be totally frustrating. In other words, they deliberately positioned themselves between frustration on the one hand and boredom on the other. The process of alternately producing and relieving tension was what made the activity stimulating.
󰀻
Subjects tended to make a ring toss activity stimulating by producing just enough   (A)   through varying the	distance to the post so as to   (B)     frustration and boredom.
           (A)  			  (B)
(1) tension	……	create 
(2) tension	……	balance
(3) competition	……	multiply 
(4) energy	……	hide 
(5) energy	……	increase
[46~48]다음을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
(A)
On the wall of our dining room was a framed quotation: “Let me live in a house by the side of the road and be a friend to man.” It inspired in me countless childhood daydreams about meeting new people from exotic places. I was a child who desperately wanted to connect with others. We did live ‘by the side of the road’ - on Route 9 between Keene and Portsmouth - but in a place so remote it was extremely difficult to be a ‘friend to man.’

(B)
Why couldn’t others also benefit from that value? I could save people the trouble of going into the store by making my produce accessible at the side of the road, and that would provide value, too. Surely I could convince people to pay half of what the grocery store charged and to feel lucky about the bargain. Suddenly, I saw a connection between those bumpy vegetables on our table and the quotation on the wall; I found a way to satisfy my longing for                  These homely fruits and vegetables would become my golden apples.	

(C)
One day when our family drove into town, I focused intently on the big, paper, grocery store signs advertising the same type of produce that we grew: ‘carrots, 50 cents a bunch,’ ‘tomatoes, 99 cents a pound.’ Meanwhile, I thought of how the type of ‘imperfect’ produce we ate for dinner, just as healthy as that sold at the store, was often tossed on the compost heap or left in the ground.		 
                         * compost heap: 퇴비 더미

(D)
The unattractive produce such as crooked carrots and odd-looking tomatoes was not valuable to the grocery store, where only ‘perfect’ produce was sold. But I knew they would have value to people who would chop them into salads or soups, can them, or use them to make pies, because that is what our family did with them. They were fresh and clean and came straight from the good earth.	

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) (B)-(C)-(D)    (2) (B)- (D)-(C)   (3) (C)-(B)-(D)
(4) (C)-(D)-(B)    (5) (D)-(C)-(B)

47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) new friends	(2) family reunions
(3) mass production	(4) farm reconstruction
(5) complete independence
48. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
(1) Keene과 Portsmouth 사이의 9번 도로변에 살았다. 
(2) 식료품점에 가는 사람들의 수고를 덜어줄 수 있다고 생각했다. 
(3) 식료품점의 당근과 토마토 광고를 주의깊게 보았다. 
(4) 토마토를 파운드당 99센트에 팔았다. 
(5) 모양이 이상해 식료품점에서 팔지 않는 야채도 가치있다고 생각했다. 

[49~50]다음을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 

A friend of mine and his wife were in Hawaii, standing on a beach, watching a beautiful sunset-hardly able to believe how magnificent the sight was. A woman approached them and overheard my friend’s wife say, “I can’t believe how beautiful this is.” While walking away from the spectacular display, the woman said, “You should have seen it in Tahiti.”
When your attention is not on the present moment but on something else, you will tend to                 , as the Tahiti traveler did, or you will wonder about future experiences instead of enjoying the present one, and regret past experiences because they are already over. But as you learn to bring your attention back to the here and now, life will come alive again, providing the enjoyment and satisfaction it was meant to. Thus, when you live in the present moment, one of the nice things that happens to you is that ordinary, everyday life takes on a new significance. Taking walks, watching a sunset, gardening, reading a book, all begin to feel special. When your attention is brought back to the here and now, you engage in life rather than think about life.

49. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) think about future events in your life
(2) concentrate better on the event at hand
(3) compare even good experiences with others
(4) be totally satisfied with the ongoing event
(5) share the moment with your loved ones

50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) Living Today to the fullest
(2) Traveling to Exotic Places
(3) What Are Friends for?
(4) Releasing Your Hidden Power
(5) Creating Future-Oriented Attitudes
