2011년 6월

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 선택한 조각상 디자인을 고르시오.
(1) (2) (3)
(4) (5)
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
(1) angry (2) envious (3) nervous
(4) relieved (5) impressed
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) 컴퓨터 사양과 업무 효율의 관련성
(2) 노트북 컴퓨터 과열 방지 방법
(3) 컴퓨터 바이러스 예방 대책
(4) 노트북 컴퓨터 배터리 관리 방법
(5) 노트북 컴퓨터 절전 모드 설정 방법
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) 보건실 청소하기 (2) 약 사러 가기
(3) 담임선생님에게 전화하기 (4) 피자 배달하기
(5) 병원에 데려다 주기
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
(1) $144 (2) $148 (3) $150
(4) $154 (5) $160
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) 환경 보호 단체 가입을 요청하려고
(2) 콘서트 장소 변경을 공지하려고
(3) 공연 중 소란에 대해 사과하려고
(4) 콘서트 취소 사실을 통보하려고
(5) 공연장 내 질서 유지를 당부하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) 창문 청소하기 (2) 제품 주문해 주기
(3) 구두 닦아 주기 (4) 아버지 선물 고르기
(5) 쇼핑 채널 알려주기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을
고르시오.
(1) 어린이집 (2) 미용실
(3) 장난감 가게 (4) 옷가게
(5) 애완동물 용품점
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
(1) 가구점 사장 - 직원 (2) 선생님 - 학부모
(3) 지하철역 직원 - 승객 (4) 부동산 중개인 - 고객
(5) 실내장식 디자이너 - 집주인
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) to pick up the car (2) to make a reservation
(3) to call the Browns (4) to go grocery shopping
(5) to buy some medicine
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지원할 직종을 고르시오.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
12. 다음을 듣고, 마술 공연에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
(1) Fantasia Gallery 개관 기념으로 열린다.
(2) 카드 마술로 유명한 John Potter가 출연할 예정이다.
(3) 본관 Stage A에서 오후 4시에 열린다.
(4) 금일 Fantasia Gallery 방문객은 공연관람료 할인을 받는다.
(5) 6세 미만의 아이는 어른이 동반해야 한다.
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
(1) I don’t know how to sell the TV.
(2) It won’t be easy to park in the garage.
(3) That’s why the place looks a lot bigger.
(4) You paid way too much for the apartment.
(5) That sofa looks very comfortable to sit in.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
(1) Don’t worry. Go see a doctor and take care.
(2) Great job! The design on them looks very nice.
(3) Thanks so much. I can pick them up right away.
(4) You’re a lifesaver. They’re in a box on my desk.
(5) Hurry up. We have to receive them by tomorrow.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
(1) No problem. What time do you go to work?
(2) Sure. Could you get me something to drink?
(3) Okay. How much are you planning to invest?
(4) Great. Are you the person to talk to about this job?
(5) Certainly. Can you recommend me to Jack Anderson?
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Elizabeth가 Roger에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Elizabeth:
(1) We should put a box here to reuse the paper.
(2) Do you know why they moved the copy machine?
(3) How about using recycled ink instead of regular ink?
(4) The boss says we need 20 more copies for the meeting.
(5) You need to call a mechanic to repair the computer.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This is an official notice from KGM, the largest manufacturer
of digital cameras in the world, regarding the rules of KGM’s
Big World Competition. First, anyone over the age of 18 is
eligible, with the exception of professional photographers.
Second, all photographs must be taken using a KGM camera.
Third, the size of your image file cannot exceed 100 megabytes.
Finally, entries must be uploaded to our website no later than
July 25, 2011. Failure to comply with any of the above rules
will disqualify the entry. A list of winners will be posted on
the website on August 15, and all winning pictures will be
displayed at the KGM gallery for a period of one year.
(1) 전문 사진작가를 모집하려고
(2) 최신형 카메라의 성능을 설명하려고
(3) 사진 촬영 시 주의사항을 전달하려고
(4) 사진 콘테스트 참가 시 유의사항을 안내하려고
(5) 카메라 회사의 고객 지원 프로그램을 홍보하려고
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Lantin decided on a necklace which had been one of his
wife’s favorites. (1) It must be worth at least seven or eight
francs he thought, because for an imitation piece the
workmanship was very good. He put it in his pocket and went
looking for a reliable-looking jeweler. At length he saw
(2) one and went in, a little ashamed of selling something so
worthless. “Monsieur,” he said to the dealer, “I’d like you to
value (3) this piece for me if you’d be so kind.” The man took
(4) the article, examined it, turned it over, weighed it, and took
up a magnifying glass to look at it more closely. Lantin was a
little embarrassed by all this ceremony and was about to say,
“Look, I’m pretty sure it’s got no value at all,” when the
jeweler announced: “Monsieur, I’d put it at between 12,000
and 15,000 francs. However, I could not purchase (5) this from
you without knowing its exact provenance.”
* provenance: 출처
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
When induced to give spoken or written witness to
something they doubt, people will often feel bad about their
deceit. Nevertheless, they begin to believe (A) what / that they
are saying. When there is no compelling external explanation
for one’s words, saying becomes believing. Tory Higgins and
his colleagues had university students read a personality
description of someone and then (B) summarize / summarized
it for someone else who was believed either to like or to dislike
this person. The students wrote a more positive description
when the recipient liked the person. Having said positive
things, they also then liked the person more themselves.
(C) Asked / Asking to recall what they had read, they remembered
the description as being more positive than it was. In short, it
seems that we are prone to adjust our messages to our listeners,
and, having done so, to believe the altered message.
(A) (B) (C)
(1) what …… summarize …… Asked
(2) what …… summarize …… Asking
(3) what …… summarized …… Asked
(4) that …… summarized …… Asking
(5) that …… summarized …… Asked
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
We want to stop watching so much TV, but demonstrably,
we also want to watch lots of TV. So what we really want, it
seems, (1) is to stop wanting. We (2) are trapped deep in a
paradox: deciding on the best course of action, then doing
something else. The way around this is (3) to see that habits
are responses to needs. This sounds (4) obvious, but countless
efforts at habit change ignore its implications. If you eat
badly, you might resolve to start eating well. However, if you
are eating burgers and ice-cream to feel comforted, relaxed
and happy, (5) try to replace them with broccoli and carrot
juice is like dealing with a leaky bathroom tap by repainting
the kitchen. What is required is not a better diet, but an
alternative way to feel comforted and relaxed.
22. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
A way to get things done more efficiently and get better
results is to do the right thing at the right time of day. Know
your own body rhythm, respect your internal clock, and pay
attention to how your energy level ebbs and flows during the
day. If you have lots of energy early in the morning, that is
when you should schedule difficult activities, whether for you
these are brainstorming, writing, or practicing. Use the same
principle in planning activities for your team. Schedule
intervals of productive time and breaks so that you get the most
from people. I always ask people to respect their own body
rhythms when scheduling appointments. In my experience,
most people are far more productive in the morning, but there
are those who differ and hit their stride later in the day.
(1) 업무 성과를 높이기 위해 오후 근무시간을 늘려라.
(2) 신체리듬에 따라 일할 수 있도록 배려하라.
(3) 업무의 특성에 따라 계획을 효과적으로 세우게 하라.
(4) 어려운 일은 공동 작업을 통해 해결하게 하라.
(5) 적절한 휴식 간격을 유지함으로써 신체리듬을 조절하게 하라.
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Since the 1980’s, zoos have strived to reproduce the natural
habitats of their animals, replacing concrete floors and steel
bars with grass, rocks, trees, and pools of water. These
environments may simulate the wild, but the animals do not have
to worry about finding food, shelter, or safety from predators.
(1) While this may not seem like such a bad deal at first glance,
the animals experience numerous complications. (2) And yet,
most of the complications were settled with no delay in order to
ensure the animals’ health and safety. (3) The zebras live
constantly in fear, smelling the lions in the nearby Great Cats
exhibit every day and finding themselves unable to escape.
(4) There is no possibility of migrating or of storing food for the
winter, which must seem to promise equally certain doom to a
bird or bear. (5) In short, zoo life is utterly incompatible with an
animal’s most deeply-rooted survival instincts.
* doom: 파멸, 종말
[24~28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. The wrapping of Christmas presents, William Waits notes,
is a fairly recent phenomenon in American life. It arose at the
turn of the 20th century, during a period when hand-made
presents were giving way to machine-made, store-bought
ones. For both givers and manufacturers, this shift presented a
problem, for the machine-made items, precisely because they
were convenient, represented less of the giver’s personal
attention than the hand-made items had done; thus they were
symbolically less intimate. To disguise this loss of symbolic
value, and to invest the manufactured items with a personal
touch, retailers encouraged shoppers to have their purchases
gift-wrapped. Gift-wrapping, in Waits’s acute term, became a
‘decontaminating mechanism’ that removed the presents from
the ‘normal flow of bought-and-sold goods’ and made them,
for a single ceremonial moment, emblems of rather
than commerce.
* emblem: 상징
(1) intimacy (2) disguise (3) generosity
(4) convenience (5) encouragement
25. Some people tend to be late as a general rule, whether they
are busy or not. To stop being late, all one has to do is change
the motivation by deciding that in all circumstances being
on time is going to have first priority over any other
consideration. Presto! You will never have to run for a plane
or miss an appointment again. As a lifelong latecomer, that is
how I cured myself. Having made the decision that
was now of major importance, I found that answers came
automatically to such questions as “Can I squeeze in one more
errand before the dentist?” or “Do I have to leave for the
airport now?” The answers are always no, and yes. Choosing
to be on time will make your life enormously easier, and that
of your family, friends, and colleagues as well.
(1) harmony (2) precision (3) promptness
(4) consistency (5) thriftiness
26. The hazards of migration range from storms to starvation,
but they are outweighed by the advantages to be found in the
temporary superabundance of food in the summer home. The
process of evolution ensures that a species migrates only if it
pays it to do so. Birds of the same species may be migratory
in one area, but sedentary elsewhere. Most song thrushes
migrate from northern Scotland; but in the south of England,
the balance of advantage against disadvantage is so delicate
that while some migrate to Spain and Portugal, the majority
normally over winter. Moreover,
England’s winters have been getting warmer since the late
1980’s and if the trend continues it is likely that our song
thrushes will become increasingly sedentary.
* sedentary: 이주하지 않는 ** thrush: [조류] 개똥지빠귀
(1) suffer from a scarcity of food
(2) do not lay eggs
(3) stay in England
(4) fly back to Scotland
(5) migrate somewhere north of England
27. Some people believe that is some kind
of instinct, developed because it benefits our species in some
way. At first, this seems like a strange idea: Darwin’s theories
of evolution presume that individuals should act to preserve
their own interests, not those of the species as a whole. But
the British evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins believes
that natural selection has given us the ability to feel pity for
someone who is suffering. When humans lived in small
clan-based groups, a person in need would be a relative or
someone who could pay you back a good turn later, so taking
pity on others could benefit you in the long run. Modern
societies are much less close-knit and when we see a heartfelt
appeal for charity, chances are we may never even meet the
person who is suffering ― but the emotion of pity is still in
our genes. [3점]
(1) not wanting to suffer (2) giving to charity
(3) drawing pity from others (4) exploring alternatives
(5) pursuing individual interests
28. Essentially, your reputation is your most valuable asset ―
so guard it well. But do not be terribly demoralized if you make
some mistakes along the way. With time it is possible to repair
a stained reputation. Every experience you have with someone
else is like a drop of water falling into a pool. As your
experiences with that person grow, the drops accumulate and
the pool deepens. Positive interactions are clear drops of water
and negative interactions are red drops of water. But they
are not equal. That is, , and
that number differs for different people. Those who are very
forgiving only need a few positive experiences ― clear drops
― to dilute a bad experience, while those who are less
forgiving need a lot more to wash away the red. [3점]
(1) a number of clear drops can dry up with time
(2) a drop of red water can lead your life to ruin
(3) a number of water drops can affect your experience
(4) a number of red drops can accumulate gradually
(5) a number of clear drops can dilute one red drop
[29~30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
29. When you are picking out products in the grocery store,
searching for the best possible strawberry jam, you are trying
to maximize your own enjoyment. You are the only person
that matters; it is your sense of pleasure that you are trying to
please. In this case, (A) is the ideal strategy. You
should listen to those cells in the brain that tell you what you
really want. However, when you are making a moral decision,
this egocentric strategy backfires. Moral decisions require taking
other people into account. You cannot act like a greedy brute
or let your anger get out of control. Doing the right thing
means thinking about (B) , using the emotional
brain to mirror the emotions of strangers. Selfishness needs to
be balanced by some selflessness.
* backfire: 역효과를 낳다
(A) (B)
(1) selflessness …… your neighbors
(2) selflessness …… utmost justice
(3) self-esteem …… genuine happiness
(4) selfishness …… eternal beauty
(5) selfishness …… everybody else
30. We tend to consider ourselves as rational decision makers,
logically evaluating the costs and benefits of each alternative
we encounter. (A) , we are much more primitive than
most assume. A team of economists looked at how consumers
reacted to various pitches by banks to take out a loan. A
purely rational view would have predicted that interest rates
would be the only factor that had an impact. But the scientists
varied more than just the interest rate; they also tested how
persuasive other approaches might be. (B) , some
letters offered a chance to win a cell phone in a lottery if the
customer came in to inquire about a loan. They found that
such an offer increased loan inquiries by as much as dropping
the interest rate five points. For a $50,000 loan, this meant
some customers were in essence willing to pay $16,000 more
in interest to receive a $100 cell phone.
(A) (B)
(1) However …… For instance
(2) However …… Moreover
(3) Furthermore …… In contrast
(4) Likewise …… In other words
(5) Likewise …… Consequently
31. 다음 글에 드러난 버스 승객들의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
It is the end of a long, tiring day at Walt Disney World, and a
busload of parents and children are starting the twenty-minute
ride back to their hotel. The children are overstimulated and
annoyed, and so are the parents. Everyone is whiny. It is a bus
ride from hell. Then, rising above the unpleasant buzz of
complaining children and parents, comes a thin, persistent
melody: The bus driver has started to sing the song ‘Under the
Sea’ from the movie The Little Mermaid. Everyone begins to
quiet down and listen. Eventually a little girl joins in, then
several more children. By the end of the ride everyone is
singing ‘The Circle of Life’ from the movie The Lion King.
The bus ride from hell has become the pleasurable, song-filled
end to a full day.
(1) irritated → delighted (2) ashamed → grateful
(3) excited → depressed (4) amused → frightened
(5) relaxed → perplexed
32. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Back in the 1870’s, Sholes & Co., a leading manufacturer of
typewriters at the time, received many (A) complaints /
compliments from users about typewriter keys sticking
together if the operator went too fast. In response, management
asked its engineers to figure out a way to prevent this from
happening. The engineers discussed the problem and then one
of them said, “What if we (B) turned / slowed the operator
down? If we did that, the keys would not jam together nearly
as much.” The result was to have an inefficient keyboard
configuration. For example, the letters ‘O’ and ‘I’ are the third
and sixth most frequently used letters in the English language,
and yet the engineers positioned them on the keyboard so that
the relatively weaker fingers had to depress them. This ‘inefficient
logic’ pervaded the keyboard, and (C) triggered / solved the
problem of keyboard jam-up.
(A) (B) (C)
(1) complaints …… turned …… triggered
(2) complaints …… slowed …… triggered
(3) complaints …… slowed …… solved
(4) compliments …… slowed …… solved
(5) compliments …… turned …… solved
33. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
According to Cambodian legends, lions once roamed the
countryside attacking villagers and their precious buffalo, and
long before the great Khmer Empire began in the 9th century,
farmers developed a fierce martial art to defend themselves
against the (1) predator. These techniques became bokator.
Meaning ‘to fight a lion,’ bokator is a martial art (2) depicted
on the walls of Angkor Wat. There are 10,000 moves to
master, (3) mimicking animals such as monkeys, elephants and
even ducks. King Jayavarman VII, the warrior king who
united Cambodia in the 12th century, made his army train in
bokator, turning it into a (4) fearsome fighting force. Despite
its long tradition in Cambodia, bokator (5) flourished when the
Khmer Rouge took power in 1975 and executed most of the
discipline’s masters over the next four years.
[34~35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. While in Japan, I ordered green tea with sugar at a
restaurant. A waiter politely explained that one does not drink
green tea with sugar. I responded that I was aware of this
custom but I liked my tea sweet. The waiter took up the issue
with the manager. After a lengthy conversation, the manager
came over and said, “I’m very sorry. We don’t have sugar.”
Disappointed, I changed my order to a cup of coffee, which
the waiter soon brought over. Resting on the saucer were two
packets of sugar. My failure to obtain a cup of sweet green tea
was due to a fundamental difference in our ideas about choice.
In America, a paying customer has every right to have a
request met. But from a Japanese perspective, it is their duty
to protect those who do not know any better.
(1) historical perspectives on Japanese customs
(2) difficulty of altering tea-drinking habits
(3) various factors influencing customer preference
(4) health benefits of drinking green tea
(5) cultural difference in dealing with customer requests
35. After a stressful day, how do you wind down and clear your
mind? Relaxing in a comfortable chair, putting on some
soothing sounds, and reading something light and entertaining
are all good methods to get ready for some restful sleep. But as
you ease your exhausted senses, do not forget your sense of
smell. Certain aromas can fill you with feelings of tranquility,
and research has found that lavender, vanilla, and green apple
are among the best smells to help lower anxiety and induce
sleep. You can use essential oils of these scents by applying
them to the back of your neck or the inside of your wrist. Even
better, indulge in a warm bath with these oils dissolved in the
water. Before bed, you might enjoy a glass of hot soy milk with
natural vanilla flavoring for a calming effect inside and out.
(1) usefulness of aroma for restful sleep
(2) factors inhibiting good sleep
(3) origins of aromatic stress-relievers
(4) reasons for stress and fatigue
(5) ways of extracting various essential oils
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the types of websites people use
when they look for new information online. (1) The most
preferred type of websites is Search Engines, whereas the least
preferred type of websites is Facebook, Myspace, Twitter, etc.
(2) The combined percentage of the two most preferred types
of websites is seventy one. (3) While there is only a three
percent difference between the top two most preferred types of
websites, there is more than a twenty percent gap between the
second and the third most preferred types of websites. (4) The
three least preferred types of websites are Wikipedia, Blogs,
and Facebook, Myspace, Twitter, etc. (5) When the percentages
of the types of websites in Social Media are combined, the
result exceeds the percentage of Sites Dedicated to a Specific
Area by ten percent.
37. Guillaume de Machaut에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Guillaume de Machaut, who was famous as both a musician
and a poet, was born in the French province of Champagne. He
studied theology and spent much of his life in the service of
various royal families. Around 1323, he became secretary and
chaplain to John, king of Bohemia, whom he accompanied on
trips and military campaigns throughout Europe. In his later
years he lived mainly in Reims, where he served as a church
official. Machaut traveled to many courts and presented
beautifully decorated copies of his music and poetry to his
noble patrons. These copies make Machaut one of the first
important composers whose works have survived. The decline
of the church in the fourteenth century is reflected in
Machaut’s output, which consists mainly of courtly love songs
for one to four performers.
(1) 신학을 공부한 후 일생 동안 평민을 위해 봉사했다.
(2) 1323년경 Bohemia 왕이 되어 전쟁에 참여하였다.
(3) Reims에 사는 동안에는 교회 활동을 하지 않았다.
(4) 귀족 후원자들에게 자신의 음악과 시의 사본을 주었다.
(5) 14세기 교회의 부흥이 그의 작품 속에 반영되어 있다.
38. Bloodhound Car에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
What’s faster than a speeding bullet and isn’t named
Superman? The answer is the Bloodhound Car, or soon will
be. Now being built in England, it is expected to be completed
within a year. Powered by three engines, it is designed to go
1,050 miles per hour (mph), which would blast past the current
land speed record of 763 mph, set in 1997. It is 13 meters long,
1.5 meters wide and 2 meters tall, and weighs 6.4 tons. Due to
its enormous weight, it won’t be the quickest car in the world
from 0 to 100 mph, as it will take 15 seconds. But after that, it
will only take 25 seconds to go from 100 to 1,000 mph! The
Bloodhound Car is scheduled to make its record-breaking
attempt in 2013 at the Hakskeen Pan Desert in South Africa.
(1) 현재 England에서 제작되고 있다.
(2) 시속 1,050마일로 주행이 가능하도록 설계되어 있다.
(3) 출발 후 시속 100마일에 도달하는 시간이 세계에서 가장 짧을 것이다.
(4) 시속 100마일에서 1,000마일로 높이는 데 25초가 걸릴 것이다.
(5) Hakskeen Pan Desert에서 기록 경신에 도전할 예정이다.
[39~40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. Here is a surprise for you: Being happy means that you
realize that there are times that you will be unhappy and
recognize that life sometimes stinks. What is uplifting in those
times is appreciating life and facing the challenges that come
with it, realizing that you are facing challenges fellow humans
have also faced. We are not saying you should lower your
expectations for your so-called perfect life or downsize your
goals; we just believe that if you can align your expectations
with reality a little more by expecting to face challenges, you
will be better off in the end. There is an interesting biological
reinforcement for this notion, too: Your levels of C-reactive
protein (a marker of damaging inflammation) have been shown
to be higher when you have expectations that are unattainable.
* align: (일직선으로) 맞추다 ** inflammation: 염증
(1) 역경을 예상하면서 기대치를 현실에 맞춰야 행복해진다.
(2) 완벽한 삶은 고난을 극복하는 과정에서 찾아온다.
(3) 타인의 입장을 이해하는 것이 행복의 출발점이다.
(4) 신체적 고통을 치유하려면 마음의 평화를 찾아야 한다.
(5) 행복하려면 큰 목표를 세우고 끊임없이 도전해야 한다.
40. The Greek philosopher Socrates observed, “The unexamined
life is not worth living.” For most people, however, reflection
and self-examination do not come naturally. As much as any
other kind of thinking, reflection requires solitude. Distraction
and reflection simply do not mix. It is not the kind of thing
you can do well near a television, while the phone is ringing,
or with children in the same room. One of the reasons I have
been able to accomplish much and keep growing personally is
that I have not only set aside time to reflect, but I have
separated myself from distractions for short blocks of time:
thirty minutes in the spa; an hour outside on a rock in my
backyard; or a few hours in a comfortable chair in my office.
The place does not matter ⎯ as long as you remove yourself
from distractions and interruptions.
(1) 자기성찰을 위해 방해받지 않는 혼자만의 시간이 필요하다.
(2) 명상과 자기성찰을 통해 자연으로 돌아가야 한다.
(3) 현대 문명의 다양한 혜택들은 자유로운 사색에 방해가 된다.
(4) 장소에 따라 명상과 자기성찰에 필요한 시간이 달라진다.
(5) 자기성찰은 고대 그리스 철학에 대한 탐구로부터 시작된다.
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. Virtuoso violinist Pinchas Zukerman was giving a master
class to a group of young artists who had come to the Aspen
Music Festival from all over the world. The auditorium was
filled with aspiring artists, distinguished teachers, and
well-known performers; the atmosphere was competitive and
electric. As each performer played, Zukerman offered friendly
advice and encouragement, invariably picking up his own
violin to demonstrate finer points of technique. The last
musician performed brilliantly. When the applause subsided,
Zukerman complimented the artist, then picked up his own
violin, tucked it under his chin, paused a long moment, and
then, without playing a note or uttering a word, he placed the
instrument back in its case. The audience responded with
deafening applause, in recognition of this master musician
who could pay so gracious a compliment.
* virtuoso: 대가, 거장 ** subside: 잠잠해지다
(1) A Long Road to Perfection
(2) Zukerman’s Rise to Fame
(3) Great Musicians from Aspen
(4) A Master’s Extraordinary Praise
(5) Violinists: Technique or Passion?
42. Whenever you stand on a scale in your bathroom or place a
melon on a scale at the grocery store, you are measuring
weight. An object’s weight is the force exerted on it by
gravity, usually the earth’s gravity. When you stand on a
bathroom scale, the scale measures just how much upward
force it must exert on you in order to keep you from moving
downward toward the earth’s center. As in most scales you will
encounter, the bathroom scale uses a spring to provide this
upward support. If you are stationary, you are not accelerating,
so your downward weight and the upward force from the
spring must cancel one another; that is, they must be equal in
magnitude but opposite in direction so that they sum to zero
net force.
(1) Selecting a Good Scale
(2) The Best Way to Measure Your Weight
(3) Weight: Two Forces in Balance
(4) The Earth’s Gravity: A Mysterious Power
(5) How to Control Your Weight
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
A few years ago we purchased a brand-new camper van.
Not long after we bought our camper, a friend of ours
asked if her family could borrow it. We were not too
interested in loaning out our spotless camper, so we
declined.
(A) That in itself would not have been so bad had it not been
for the mice. Mice were attracted by the food and they
shredded all the curtains, screens, and cushions. Had we
let the friend borrow the camper, she would have
discovered the boxes before the mice did.
(B) This happened in the fall, and we stored the camper in our
backyard all that winter. In the spring my husband and I
were setting it up to prepare for a trip.
(C) We were very surprised to find that we had left cookie
boxes in the camper over the winter. We had moved and
had a baby that previous summer and fall, and cleaning
out the camper had been overlooked.
(1) (A) － (C) － (B) (2) (B) － (A) － (C)
(3) (B) － (C) － (A) (4) (C) － (A) － (B)
(5) (C) － (B) － (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
But when ice forms, they can walk out to a hole near
where the seals are swimming, then sit and wait for a seal
to pop its head up to breathe.
Across the Arctic, polar bear numbers are in decline. If the
climate continues to warm at the current rate, the bears could
disappear completely in the next hundred years. ( (1) ) But
for now, if you visit Churchill, Canada in October or
November, it’s almost a sure thing you’ll see a polar bear in
the wild. ( (2) ) Churchill, population 914, sits on the edge of
Hudson Bay at the point where the ice first forms every
winter. And these bears love ice. ( (3) ) Their fondness for
frozen seas is simple: Ice means they can eat their favorite
meal ― seals. ( (4) ) Although polar bears are powerful
marine mammals, able to swim a hundred miles or more
nonstop, they’re too slow to catch a seal in open water. ( (5) )
Or as a bear might put it, “Dinner is served.”
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Behavioral evidence for separate types of taste receptors
comes from studies of the following type: Soak your tongue
for 15 seconds in a sour solution, such as unsweetened
lemon juice. Then try tasting some other sour solution, such
as dilute vinegar. You will find that the second solution
tastes less sour than usual. Depending on the concentrations
of the lemon juice and vinegar, the second solution may not
taste sour at all. This phenomenon, called adaptation,
reflects the fatigue of receptors sensitive to sour tastes.
Now try tasting something salty, sweet, or bitter. These
substances taste about the same as usual. In short, you
experience little cross-adaptation ― reduced response to
one taste after exposure to another. Evidently, the sour
receptors are different from the other taste receptors.
Similarly, you can show that salt receptors are different
from the others and so forth.
The fact that the intensity of a taste is (A) after trying
the same taste, but not after trying a different taste, serves
as evidence for the existence of (B) receptors for
different tastes.
(A) (B)
(1) increased …… adaptive
(2) increased …… identical
(3) measured …… sensitive
(4) decreased …… distinct
(5) decreased …… collective
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
My sister, Tara, was the quiet one in the family. She was
not as adventurous as my brother and I. She never excelled at
school or sports. Of course, I loved my sister, but, at times,
that was not so easy to do. She seldom made eye contact
with me. When we ran into each other at school, (a) she
sometimes pretended not to recognize me.
One day, my father’s job forced us to move to a new
neighborhood. The nurse at our new school, Emerson, gave
us ear and eye exams, our first ever. I aced the tests ― “Eagle
eyes and elephant ears,” the nurse said ― but Tara struggled
to read the eye chart. (b) She declared Tara severely
shortsighted and she had to get glasses. When the glasses
were ready, we all went downtown to pick them up. The first
time she tried them on, she kept moving her head around and
up and down. “What’s the matter?” I asked. “You can see that
tree over there?” she said, pointing at a sycamore tree about a
hundred feet away. I nodded. (c) She sobbed, “I can see not
just the branches, but each little leaf.” Tara burst into tears.
On the way home, she kept seeing for the first time all
these things that most everyone else had stopped noticing.
She read street signs and billboards aloud. She pointed out
sparrows sitting on the telephone wires. At home, Tara
insisted that I try on her glasses. I put them on, and the world
turned into fuzzy, unfocused shapes. I took a few steps and
banged my knee on the coffee table. It was at that very
moment that I truly understood Tara for the first time. I
realized why (d) she did not like to go exploring, or why she
did not recognize me at school.
Tara loved seeing the world clearly. Not long after she got
her glasses, she decided she wanted to be an artist. She
started compulsively drawing and painting all the wondrous
things she was discovering. (e) Her first painting of the
sycamore tree is still her favorite. Today, she is an art teacher
at Emerson, where she tries to bring the best out of each
individual student.
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) Seeing with Inner Eyes
(2) Sisters in a Flood of Tears
(3) Wearing the Wrong Glasses
(4) A New World Through Glasses
(5) Alternative Ways to Be an Art Teacher
47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
(1) (a) (2) (b) (3) (c) (4) (d) (5) (e)
48. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
(1) 화자(I)는 아버지의 직장 때문에 이사하게 되었다.
(2) Tara는 시력검사에서 근시판정을 받았다.
(3) 화자(I)는 Tara의 안경을 쓰고 잘 볼 수 있었다.
(4) Tara는 안경을 쓰게 된 후 화가가 되고 싶다는 마음을 먹었다.
(5) 현재 Tara는 Emerson 학교의 미술교사이다.
[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
I observe the moon wherever I go. What phase is it in, I
wonder? When will it reach the full moon phase? Now
imagine what happened to me recently when I was teaching
in Australia, 12,000 miles from my hometown in North
America. Shortly after my arrival, seeing that the skies were
cloudy, I checked the newspaper for a weather report.
Typically, the weather page also gives times for sunrise and
sunset as well as moonrise and moonset.
(B)
Picture my surprise when I discovered that the illustrations
in the newspaper were, by my experience, wrong. The
waxing moon appeared to be illuminated on the left side
rather than the right side as I had always known it to be. “I
must call the newspaper,” I thought. But I continued to study
the images in the newspaper and then consulted a globe.
* wax: (점점) 커지다
(C)
The point is that often we do not see things as they are.
Instead, we see things as we are. That is why it is necessary
in science to have many people making many observations
of the same phenomenon. I am sure that to people in
Australia, .
(D)
When I imagined myself standing on a spot in the southern
hemisphere, the answer came to me. Here, indeed, south of
the equator, the waxing moon appears to be on the left. Try
this in your imagination, and you will see it, too.
49. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
(1) (B) － (D) － (C) (2) (C) － (B) － (D)
(3) (C) － (D) － (B) (4) (D) － (B) － (C)
(5) (D) － (C) － (B)
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) solar energy would play an important role
(2) the waxing of the moon would be easier to notice
(3) the weather in North America appears better than it is
(4) the scientific discoveries in North America are universal
(5) the moon in North America would seem strange as well

1
8
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

2011년 9월

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 문을 고르시오.
(1) (2) (3)
(4) (5)
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
(1) delighted (2) relieved (3) indifferent
(4) worried (5) frightened
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) 신학기 수강신청 요령
(2) 기숙사 이용 수칙 변경
(3) 봄방학 캠프 신청 안내
(4) 도난 상황 발생 시 대응 수칙
(5) 봄방학 중 기숙사 도난 방지 방법
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) 에어컨 켜기 (2) 선풍기 가져오기
(3) 에어컨 온도 낮추기 (4) 선풍기 수리하기
(5) 냉방 기준 변경 신청하기
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 차액으로 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
(1) $5 (2) $6 (3) $7 (4) $9 (5) $10
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) 먼지의 유해성을 경고하려고
(2) 청소기가 고장 난 상태를 설명하려고
(3) 다양한 마루 바닥재를 소개하려고
(4) 최신 청소기 제품을 홍보하려고
(5) 이사 갈 아파트의 청소를 의뢰하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) 지하철 노선 알려주기 (2) 자동차 수리 맡기기
(3) 차로 박물관까지 태워주기 (4) 남대문시장 안내하기
(5) 외국인 친구 소개해주기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을
고르시오.
(1) 수영장 (2) 약국 (3) 은행
(4) 보건실 (5) 식당
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
(1) 우체국 직원 - 고객 (2) 버스 운전사 - 승객
(3) 관광 가이드 - 관광객 (4) 호텔 직원 - 투숙객
(5) 식당 종업원 - 지배인
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) to help his brother (2) to fix the computer
(3) to design the poster (4) to put up the posters
(5) to mail out the invitations
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 휴대전화를
고르시오.
12. 다음을 듣고, Atlantic Cruise Tour에 관한 내용과 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
(1) 첫 방문지는 수영이나 스노클링을 할 수 있는 해변이다.
(2) 오전 11시에는 Queens 섬을 방문할 예정이다.
(3) 점심식사 이후에 돌고래 쇼가 예정되어 있다.
(4) Coral 섬에서는 사진촬영을 할 수 없다.
(5) 버스는 오전 8시 정각에 출발할 예정이다.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
(1) It’s totally none of your business.
(2) Today I’d like to hear about your childhood.
(3) The book industry has also declined drastically.
(4) It’s a great honor to have you here in my office.
(5) This is my first time visiting the Statue of Liberty.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
(1) Thank you for buying my old furniture.
(2) I’ll post an ad on the website right away.
(3) Don’t forget to keep in touch after you move.
(4) I wish you luck in getting into the university.
(5) I’m really happy I can finally get a new fridge.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
(1) I think the newspaper is more interesting.
(2) I know exactly what he’s going to order.
(3) Let’s cancel their reservation tomorrow.
(4) I can’t wait to taste his dishes.
(5) Let’s keep our fingers crossed.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Angelina가 Scott에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Angelina:
(1) It’s a good thing that you came early today.
(2) You have to pay a fine for parking illegally.
(3) You should answer the phone call immediately.
(4) Don’t feel bad since you learned a good lesson.
(5) I told you that you should buy a new cell phone.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
So, you’re ready to add a new member, a furry one, to
your family. But now you have one more decision to
make: What kind of dog should I get? Here are some tips
to consider when choosing a dog that is right for you.
First, pick a dog that fits your home. Bring a big one into
your house only if you can give him a lot of space.
Second, don’t buy a shaggy dog if you’re allergic. Getting
a non-shedding dog is a good idea if you’re worried about
loose hairs or your kids’ allergies. Third, pick a
mild-mannered puppy that is likely to be more forgiving
and protective of his little owners. Keep these in mind,
and you’ll enjoy having the new member at home.
* shaggy: 털북숭이의
(1) 애완견 훈련 방법에 관해 안내하려고
(2) 애완견 유기의 문제점에 관해 지적하려고
(3) 애완견 위생 관리 요령에 관해 설명하려고
(4) 애완견을 기르는 어려움에 관해 알려주려고
(5) 애완견 선택 시 고려사항에 관해 조언하려고
19. 밑줄 친 She[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Switching on the light in the nursery, Evelyn found her
baby daughter, Julie, tossing feverishly and giving out odd
little cries. (1) She put her hand against Julie’s cheeks. They
were burning. With an exclamation, she followed (2) her
baby’s arm down under the cover until she found her little
hand. The whole thumb was swollen to the wrist and in the
center was a little inflamed sore. (3) She rushed to the
phone. Doctor Foulke, the family physician, sounded upset at
being called out of bed at midnight. She ran back to the
nursery to check on her daughter. Taking a closer look, she
found (4) her thumb to be somewhat more swollen. (5) She
knelt beside the bed and began smoothing back Julie’s hair
over and over.
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
You have to pay close attention to someone’s normal
pattern in order to notice a deviation from it when he or she
lies. Sometimes the variation is as (A) subtle / subtly as a
pause. Other times it is obvious and abrupt. I recently saw a
news interview with an acquaintance (B) who / whom I was
certain was going to lie about a few particularly sensitive
issues, and lie she did. During most of her interview she was
calm and direct, but when she started lying, her manner
changed dramatically: she threw her head back, laughed in
‘disbelief,’ and shook her head back and forth. It is true that
the questions (C) dealt / dealing with very personal issues,
but I have found that in general, no matter how touchy the
question, if a person is telling the truth his or her manner
will not change significantly or abruptly.
(A) (B) (C)
(1) subtle …… who …… dealt
(2) subtle …… who …… dealing
(3) subtle …… whom …… dealt
(4) subtly …… who …… dealt
(5) subtly …… whom …… dealing
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Fieldwork is the hallmark of cultural anthropology. It is the
way we explore and learn about the vast (1) detailed intricacy
of human culture and individual behavior. And it is,
importantly, the way (2) in which most cultural anthropologists
earn and maintain their professional standing. Some of the
early personal accounts of anthropologists in the field make
fieldwork (3) sound exciting, adventuresome, certainly exotic,
sometimes easy. Malinowski, the classic anthropological
fieldworker, describes the early stages of fieldwork as ‘a strange,
sometimes unpleasant, sometimes intensely interesting
adventure which soon (4) adopts quite a natural course.’ He
goes on to describe his daily routine of strolling through the
village (5) observed the intimate details of family life, and as
he tells it, such observations seem possible and accessible.
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Albert Einstein sought relentlessly for a so-called unified
field theory ― a theory capable of describing nature’s forces
within a single, all-encompassing, coherent framework. (1)
Einstein was not motivated by the things we often associate
with scientific undertakings, such as trying to explain this or
that piece of experimental data. (2) Instead, he was driven by
a passionate belief that the deepest understanding of the
universe would reveal its truest wonder: the simplicity and
power of the principles on which it is based. (3) As in
Einstein’s formulation, the two theories underlying the
tremendous progress of physics were mutually incompatible.
(4) Einstein wanted to illuminate the workings of the
universe with a clarity never before achieved, allowing us
all to stand in awe of its sheer beauty and elegance. (5) In
his day, however, Einstein never realized this dream, mainly
because a number of essential features of matter and the
forces of nature were either unknown or, at best, poorly
understood.
23. 다음 글에서 지도자에 관하여 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장
적절한 것은?
Effective leaders set the tone for the entire organization.
It’s not a matter of knowing more than everyone else. There
are plenty of leaders who are not the biggest experts in their
companies. But it does mean working hard, something anyone
can do. Be the first person to arrive at the workplace and be
the last one to leave. If you can do that, you will already be
light years ahead of most managers in the respect you will
gain from your team members. Apply the same principle to all
your routine activities. If you expect your sales force to make
50 calls each day, make 100 calls yourself. It is not rocket
science. It is just basic ‘lead by example’ management. No
one can really discredit leaders who are the hardest-working
individuals in their organizations.
(1) 부서별 경쟁을 활성화하라.
(2) 열심히 일하고 솔선수범하라.
(3) 전문성과 유연성을 겸비하라.
(4) 중간 관리자의 역할을 존중하라.
(5) 친화력으로 직장 내 화합을 도모하라.
[24～28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. Science is making the future, and nations are busy
making future scientists. The more science that emerges
from this investment, the greater the need for us to follow
the gist of the science with sufficient understanding. In
other words, if we the ordinary people are to keep pace
with science, we need more science writers, and more
science writing that is clear, wise and eloquent, and that
demands to be read. People often feel excluded from
science, convinced that it takes an advanced degree to
understand what scientists do. As a result, they defensively
shrug off the whole business as an exclusive realm of little
relevance to their lives. One of the surest cures for
scientific is great scientific literature,
writing that does not merely translate technical terms into
plain English or explain complicated ideas simply.
(1) intolerance (2) immorality (3) illiteracy
(4) irregularity (5) manipulation
25. . If I assign fifty students a
five-page essay on the subject of why the Roman Empire
fell, most of them are likely to say it was a combination
of economic and social causes ultimately leading to a
weakening of the frontiers. This would be a fine answer,
but after reading forty-five papers all saying the same
thing, I’m ready for a change. If you can take a different
angle from the rest of the class in a paper, you’re more
likely to impress your professors. But here’s the tricky
part ― being different is risky, and it only works if you
back up your argument very well. If you choose to argue
that Rome fell solely because Christianity weakened the
fighting spirit of the Romans, you will need persuasive
reasoning and arguments against any potential objections.
(1) Variety is the spice of life
(2) The essence of writing is in its brevity
(3) Don’t fix what is not broken
(4) The pen is mightier than the sword
(5) Rome was not built in a day
26. Consumers of different age groups obviously have very
different needs and wants. Although people who belong to
the same age group differ in many other ways, they do tend
to share a set of values and common cultural experiences
that they carry throughout life. In some cases, marketers
initially develop a product to attract one age group and then
try to . That is what the
high-octane energy drink Reddox does. The company
aggressively introduced it in bars, nightclubs, and gyms to
the product’s core audience of young people. Over time, it
became popular in other contexts, and the company began
to sponsor the PGA European Tour to expand its reach to
older golfers. It also hands out free cans to commuters, cab
drivers, and car rental agencies to promote the drink as a
way to stay alert on the road. [3점]
(1) raise its retail price
(2) broaden its appeal later on
(3) upgrade it for other age groups
(4) increase demand by limiting supply
(5) create a positive image via the mass media
27. is aggravated by the
overabundance of information at our disposal. While this
is obvious enough in some realms ― for example,
consider how much information is potentially relevant for
estimating the value of Microsoft stock ― even when the
information set seems less cluttered, information overload,
a state of confusion and decision avoidance, can still
occur. In one experiment, shoppers in a supermarket
were presented with free samples of jams and jellies. In
the first treatment, a small selection was available for
tasting; in the second, a large selection was available.
While everyone likes the idea of abundant choice, and
indeed the table with the greater selection attracted larger
crowds, it was the table with fewer samples that led to
the most sales. The likely reason is that the large
selection led to information overload, the feeling that the
decision was too complicated for immediate action.
(1) Difficulty in assessing information
(2) The shortage of trustworthy informants
(3) Mental fatigue caused by misleading information
(4) Indeterminacy arising from indirect information
(5) The complexity of altering consumer behavior
28. The essence of science is to uncover patterns and
regularities in nature by finding algorithmic compressions
of observations. But the raw data of observation rarely
exhibit explicit regularities. Instead we find that nature’s
order is hidden from us, it is written in code. To make
progress in science we need to crack the cosmic code, to
dig beneath the raw data and uncover the hidden order. I
often liken fundamental science to doing a crossword
puzzle. Experiment and observation provide us with
clues, but the clues are cryptic, and require some
considerable ingenuity to solve. With each new solution,
. As with a crossword, so
with the physical universe, we find that the solutions to
independent clues link together in a consistent and
supportive way to form a coherent unity, so that the
more clues we solve, the easier we find it to fill in the
missing features. [3점]
* cryptic: 비밀스러운
(1) the depth of scientific experiments keeps us in awe
(2) we glimpse a bit more of the overall pattern of nature
(3) the code-breaking process becomes increasingly mysterious
(4) the regularity of nature is revealed in its entirety to
the observer
(5) we crack the cosmic codes one by one, replacing an
old solution with the new one
[29～30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
29. Like an artist who pursues both enduring excellence and
shocking creativity, great companies foster a (A)
between continuity and change. On the one hand, they
adhere to the principles that produced success in the first
place, yet on the other hand, they continually evolve,
modifying their approach with creative improvements and
intelligent adaptation. But the point here is not as simple as
“some companies failed because they did not change.”
Companies that change constantly but without any consistent
rationale will (B) just as surely as those that change
not at all. There is nothing inherently wrong with
adhering to specific practices and strategies. But you should
comprehend the underlying why behind those practices, and
thereby see when to keep them and when to change them.
(A) (B)
(1) tension …… collapse
(2) tension …… prosper
(3) balance …… flourish
(4) divergence …… succeed
(5) divergence …… perish
30. Since most of you are working on a word processor, it
seems silly to spend too much time on spelling. Your
word-processing program will spell check items for you.
(A) , spelling is not a completely lost art. There
are words that are not in the spell checker’s dictionary.
Also, your spell checker will not help you if you
misspell a word and mistakenly turn it into another word.
(B) , when you write ‘lightening’ instead of
‘lightning,’ the program will not recognize the error. So, get
in the habit of rereading your work and looking up words
that the spell checker does not pick up. You need to
develop the skill of knowing when words look wrong.
Never hand something in until you have checked it.
(A) (B)
(1) However …… For example
(2) However …… Therefore
(3) That is …… Similarly
(4) In addition …… For example
(5) In addition …… Therefore
31. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
It was the day of the audition. I hadn’t slept a wink the
previous night. Strangely, I wasn’t tired. It could have been the
adrenaline pumping through my veins, or maybe it was the
five cups of coffee I drank that morning. Either way, I couldn’t
sit still. I kept getting up and down from my chair, pacing
around the room. A dozen thoughts went through my head.
Would I remember my lines? Would I be able to display the
right emotions? I kept telling myself to relax but the butterflies
in my stomach had an intention of their own. When my name
was called, I slowly stepped in front of the judges. Their gaze
fell heavy upon me. My mind drew a complete blank.
(1) jealous (2) satisfied (3) sympathetic
(4) angry (5) nervous
32. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
From the twelve million articles on Wikipedia to the
millions of free secondhand goods offered on websites,
we are discovering that money is not the only motivator.
(A) Altruism / Selfishness has always existed, but the Web
gives it a platform where the actions of individuals can have
global impact. In a sense, zero-cost distribution has turned
sharing into an industry. From the point of view of the
monetary economy it all looks free ― indeed, it looks like
unfair competition ― but that says more about our shortsighted
ways of measuring value than it does about the worth of what
is created. The incentives to (B) share / dominate can range
from reputation and attention to less measurable factors such
as expression, fun, satisfaction, and simply self-interest.
Sometimes the giving is (C) conscious / unintentional . You
give information to Google when you have a public website,
whether you intend to or not, and you give aluminum cans
to the homeless guy who collects them from the recycling
bin, even if that is not what you meant to do.
(A) (B) (C)
(1) Altruism …… share …… conscious
(2) Altruism …… share …… unintentional
(3) Altruism …… dominate …… conscious
(4) Selfishness …… share …… conscious
(5) Selfishness …… dominate …… unintentional
33. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Life is full of hazards. Disease, enemies and starvation are
always menacing primitive man. Experience teaches him
that medicinal herbs, valor, the most strenuous labor, often
come to naught, yet normally he wants to (1) survive and
enjoy the good things of existence. Faced with this problem,
he takes to any method that seems (2) adapted to his ends.
Often his ways appear incredibly (3) crude to us moderns
until we remember how our next-door neighbor acts in like
emergencies. When medical science pronounces him (4) curable,
he will not resign himself to fate but runs to the nearest
quack who holds out hope of recovery. His urge for
self-preservation will not down, nor will that of the illiterate
peoples of the world, and in that overpowering will to live is
anchored the belief in supernaturalism, which is absolutely
(5) universal among known peoples, past and present.
* quack: 돌팔이 의사
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. Some species seem to have a stronger influence than others
on their ecosystem. Take away the sea stars along the northwest
coast of the United States, for instance, and the ecosystem
changes dramatically; in the absence of these sea stars, their
favorite prey, mussels, takes over and makes it hard for other
species that used to live there. Sea stars are known as
keystone species, because as top predators they determine
ecosystem structure by their eating habits. If you chop down
an aspen tree by a beaver pond, not much will happen; but if
you take away a beaver, a wetland might dry out, changing
the kinds of plants that live there and the animals that rely on
them. Because beavers exert their influence by physically
altering the landscape, they are known as ecosystem engineers.
(1) ways of cultivating ecosystem engineers
(2) altering the ecosystem along the U.S. coasts
(3) species playing a major role in the ecosystem
(4) causes of population reduction in some species
(5) necessity of protecting endangered species in wetlands
35. Despite the fact that ancient civilizations relied upon the
apparent motion of celestial bodies through the sky to
determine seasons, months, and years, we know little about
the details of timekeeping in prehistoric eras. But wherever
we turn up records and artifacts, we usually discover that in
every culture, some people were preoccupied with measuring
the passage of time. Ice-age hunters in Europe over 20,000
years ago scratched lines and made holes in sticks and
bones, possibly counting the days between phases of the
moon. Five thousand years ago, Sumerians in the
Tigris-Euphrates valley had a calendar that divided the year
into 30 day months, and the day into 12 periods. We have
no written records of Stonehenge, built over 4,000 years ago
in England, but its alignments show its purposes apparently
included the determination of seasonal or celestial events.
* celestial: 천체의
(1) contrast in timekeeping between ancient and modern society
(2) significance of making a calendar in human history
(3) astronomy and the western religious rituals
(4) measuring time in ancient civilizations
(5) observing stars in prehistoric eras
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
The above graph shows the number of professionals per
1,000 high school participants and the median lifetime
earnings for the given six sports in the United States in 2008.
(1) Basketball had the highest median lifetime earnings and
hockey had the highest number of professionals per 1,000
high school participants. (2) Soccer had the lowest median
lifetime earnings and the lowest number of professionals per
1,000 high school participants. (3) Golf and baseball, ranked
second and third in median lifetime earnings respectively, both
had median lifetime earnings above 6 million dollars. (4) The
only two sports that had median lifetime earnings less than
4 million dollars were football and soccer. (5) Except for
hockey, which had more than 4 professionals per 1,000 high
school participants, the remaining five sports all had less than
1.5 professionals per 1,000 high school participants.
37. Sveta Bogoroditsa에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The church ‘Sveta Bogoroditsa’ (‘Holy Virgin’) in
Karlovo has a handsome profile with its blue and white
bell tower. The bell tower is relatively new, from 1897, but
the church building, as the inscription above the western
entrance tells us, dates from 1851. Before they began
constructing this new building in 1847, the older church of
the Holy Virgin had burned down in 1813. This latter
church, about which little is known, is believed by some to
have been built already at the end of the fifteenth century,
at the time of the founding of the little town of Karli-ova,
later Karlovo. In any case, the names of priests serving in
the church have been preserved from the eighteenth century
on. Although the construction was completed in 1851, the
events of the Crimean War and lack of funds delayed the
furnishing of the church, and its consecration did not take
place until May 20, 1858.
* consecration: 헌당(식)
(1) 윤곽선이 아름다우며 흑색 종탑을 가지고 있다.
(2) 교회 건물보다 먼저 세워진 종탑이 있다.
(3) Karli-ova 마을이 세워질 무렵 화재로 타 버렸다.
(4) 봉직한 사제들의 이름이 18세기부터 보존되어 있다.
(5) 1851년 건물 완공과 동시에 모든 비품을 갖추었다.
38. Edwin Armstrong에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Edwin Armstrong, who first discovered and developed FM
radio in the 1920s and early 1930s, is often considered the
most prolific and influential inventor in radio history. He
alone understood the impact of De Forest’s vacuum tube, and
he used it to invent an amplifying system that enabled radio
receivers to pick up distant signals. Armstrong’s innovations
rendered useless the enormous alternators used for generating
power in early radio transmitters. In 1922, he sold a ‘super’
version of his circuit to Radio Corporation of America (RCA)
for $200,000 and sixty thousand shares of RCA stock,
making him a millionaire as well as RCA’s largest private
stockholder. Armstrong also worked on the major problem of
radio reception ― electrical interference. Between 1930 and
1933, the inventor filed five patents on FM.
* alternator: 교류발전기
(1) 라디오 역사상 가장 영향력 있는 발명가로 여겨지곤 한다.
(2) 전파 수신기로 하여금 원거리 신호를 잡게 해주는 증폭 장치를
발명했다.
(3) 그의 혁신적 장치들로 인하여 초기 전파 송신기에 사용되던
거대한 교류발전기가 필요 없어졌다.
(4) 1922년에 자신의 고성능 회로를 RCA에 기증했다.
(5) 1930년부터 1933년 사이에, FM에 관한 5개의 특허를 출원했다.
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. Despite what you might think, luck isn’t a matter of fate
or destiny, according to research by psychologist Richard
Wiseman. Instead, it’s a result of the way lucky people
think and act ― which means that anyone can learn to be
lucky! For instance, Wiseman found that lucky people
always take notice of what’s going on around them and stay
open to new experiences and opportunities. Meanwhile,
unlucky people tend to be tenser and too focused on certain
tasks, which stops them from noticing opportunities they
aren’t explicitly looking for. So, next time you’re heading
to a party, don’t go in with a goal in mind (no matter how
much you want to attract someone). Instead, take things as
they come and you never know what might happen. You
could even make some awesome new friends.
(1) 열린 사고와 행동은 행운을 불러온다.
(2) 열정과 몰입은 행운을 부르는 지름길이다.
(3) 행동하기 전에 생각하는 습관이 필요하다.
(4) 운명에 도전하면 좋은 기회가 오기 마련이다.
(5) 새로운 친구들을 사귀다 보면 이상형을 만나기 쉽다.
40. In a study conducted by Karen O’Quinn and Joel
Aronoff, participants were asked to negotiate with a seller
over the purchase price of a piece of art. Toward the end
of the negotiation, the seller made a final offer in one of
two ways. Half of the time he said that he would accept
$6,000, while the other half of the time he gave the same
final price but also added a little humor (“Well, my final
offer is $6,000, and I’ll throw in my pet frog”). Those few
moments of attempted humor had a large effect, as
participants made a much greater compromise in their
purchase price when they heard about the frog. It seemed
that the brief humorous comment momentarily put the
participants in a good mood and encouraged them to be
more giving.
(1) 상대를 존중하면 가격 협상이 쉽게 이루어진다.
(2) 예상 구매자의 성향파악이 중요하다.
(3) 거래의 성사를 위해 적절한 가격 제시가 필요하다.
(4) 유머를 사용하면 협상을 유리하게 이끌 수 있다.
(5) 신중한 협상 자세는 이익을 극대화시킨다.
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. The green revolution was a mixed blessing. Over time
farmers came to rely heavily on broadly adapted, high-yield
crops to the exclusion of varieties adapted to local
conditions. Monocropping vast fields with the same
genetically uniform seeds helps boost yield and meet
immediate hunger needs. Yet high-yield varieties are also
genetically weaker crops that require expensive chemical
fertilizers and toxic pesticides. The same holds true for
high-yield livestock breeds, which often require expensive
feed and medicinal care to survive in foreign climates. The
drive to increase production is pushing out local varieties,
diluting livestock’s genetic diversity in the process. As a
result, the world’s food supply has become largely
dependent on a shrinking list of breeds designed for
maximum yield. In short, in our focus on increasing the
amount of food we produce today, we have accidentally put
ourselves at risk for food shortages in the future.
(1) Pros and Cons of Using Chemical Fertilizers
(2) Is Genetic Diversity a Blessing in Disguise?
(3) Who Will Conquer Famine, Farmers or Scientists?
(4) Livestock Diseases: A Never-ending Struggle
(5) Farming Uniform Breeds: A Double-edged Sword
42. About twenty years ago, Time magazine described a
study by a psychologist of people who had lost their jobs
three times due to plant closings. The writers were amazed
by what they discovered. They expected the people being
laid off to be beaten down and discouraged. Instead they
found them to be incredibly resilient. Why was that? They
concluded that people who had weathered repeated
adversity had learned to bounce back. People who had lost
a job and found a new one twice before were much better
prepared to deal with adversity than someone who had
always worked at the same place and had never faced
adversity. It may sound ironic, but if you have experienced
a lot of failure, you are actually in a better position to
achieve success than people who have not.
(1) Setbacks: Not All Bad
(2) A Shortcut Toward Happiness
(3) Job Satisfaction vs. Job Security
(4) Searching for the Causes of Human Despair
(5) Adversity and Failure: An Unhealthy Combination
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
One reason why the definitions of words have
changed over time is simply because of their misuse.
There are a growing number of examples where the
incorrect meaning of relatively commonplace language
has become more widespread than the original intention
or definition.
(A) Now, imagine that an angry customer sent you a letter
about the service he received in one of your stores. If
your reply is that you ‘perused his letter,’ he is likely
to get even more angry than he was before.
(B) The word ‘peruse’ is one of them. Most people think
that to ‘peruse’ something means to ‘scan or skim it
quickly, without paying much attention.’ In fact, this is
the exact opposite of what ‘peruse’ really means: ‘to
study or read something carefully, in detail.’
(C) But the word has been misused so often by so many
people, that this second sense of it ― the exact
opposite of what it actually means ― has finally been
accepted as a secondary definition and as far as most
people know, it is the only definition.
(1) (A) - (C) - (B) (2) (B) - (A) - (C)
(3) (B) - (C) - (A) (4) (C) - (A) - (B)
(5) (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
The smartest of our deep ancestors would have stored
their excess meat in the bodies and minds of others
(not just their own kin).
Evolutionary psychologists have suggested that the
absence of any effective form of refrigeration was critical
to our early moral development. Let’s say that you’re an
early humanoid hunting and gathering on the African
savannah and you strike it lucky. ( (1) ) You come
across a huge beast and you manage to kill it. ( (2) ) It
yields far more meat than anyone involved in the hunt or
their families can possibly consume. ( (3) ) How do you
get the most benefit of your excess meat without a fridge,
or anywhere to store it? ( (4) ) Provided those benefiting
from your gift could possibly repay your generosity in the
future, that was the best thing you could do with excess
meat. ( (5) ) Groups of early humans who developed
stable relationships and practiced this sort of mutual
altruism were in a better position to prosper and multiply.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
A bumper sticker reading “Don’t Believe Everything
You Think” is placed on the edge of the whiteboard in
Greene’s office. It represents the underlying message of
the book he is writing. An analogy carried throughout
the book compares the moral brain to a camera with
automatic settings for taking a picture of a mountain or
an indoor portrait or a close-up of a flower, and manual
settings for unusual conditions or when we want a
nonstandard artistic effect. Greene believes emotions and
intuitions are the auto settings for our morality while
reasoning is the manual mode.
We need our intuitions to make the millions of quick
judgments that fill our lives from day to day or else we
could not function. But they are not always trustworthy
moral indicators, since they were set to handle problems
deep in our evolutionary past and are often useless for
the newer complexities of the modern world. We need to
rely on our manual settings, the reasoning sections of our
brain, for more complex or novel situations, Greene says.
󰀻
According to Greene’s view on the moral brain,
emotions and intuitions make our lives easier in making
(A) decisions, but we need to rely on (B)
for more complex problems.
(A) (B)
(1) unusual …… conscience
(2) everyday …… reasoning
(3) difficult …… logic
(4) moral …… creativity
(5) habitual …… imagination

[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
I grew up in a small town in northern California,
between wide-open ranchland and dark forests, feeling at
home in two places: the wild land and books. I read
constantly, hungrily, and without direction, collecting a
strange stew of facts and ideas about the rest of the
world. I longed for a world away from what I knew
and outrageously outside my means.
(B)
The important lesson I learned at (a) Billups ― the world
was a lot bigger than I had imagined it to be ― was a little
painful. It meant I was a lot smaller than I’d realized. I
went on to attend a state university and I began to write
about my disappearing dreams and new dreams, about
wishing and disappointment and feeling small. One day a
professor (b) there took hold of me and said, “You’re a
writer.” Until then, I hadn’t really known. I had to figure
out who I was not going to be before I could get on to
who I was. The lesson from Billups lay below the surface,
but when I began to write, it rose like flowers and bloomed
into words and stories and books, and me.
(C)
One morning I came across a catalog for a college
preparatory school called Billups Academy. (c) It had a
summer program and offered scholarships for high
school students to ‘deepen and extend their intellectual,
aesthetic, and moral interests.’ I applied for and won a
scholarship. Billups wasn’t just another school ― it was
another world. I was used to big skies, wild water,
snakes and horses, and solitude. What waited for me in
(d) this new world was tree-lined avenues, brick
buildings with white pillars, and a wood-paneled library.
(D)
Unlike back at home, in (e) the new school, I was no
longer the smartest kid in the classroom. I wasn’t the most
talented, or the least. Before going to Billups, one of my
dreams was to become a photographer. That dream came to
an abrupt halt in a photography class. There was no
denying in the other students’ pictures that they were far
more talented than I was. I became severely depressed as
one dream after another faded from me. Then, on the last
night of the summer program, it hit me. I had been blind
to a lesson that was staring at me in the face.
46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
(1) (B) - (D) - (C) (2) (C) - (B) - (D)
(3) (C) - (D) - (B) (4) (D) - (B) - (C)
(5) (D) - (C) - (B)
47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 의미하는 바가 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
(1) (a) (2) (b) (3) (c) (4) (d) (5) (e)
48. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
(1) 북 캘리포니아에서 꾸준히 책을 읽으면서 자랐다.
(2) Billups에서 전에 생각했던 것보다 세상이 더 크다는 것을
깨달았다.
(3) 대학 입학 후 사라져가는 꿈과 새로운 꿈에 관해 글을 쓰기
시작했다.
(4) Billups가 제공하는 장학금을 받고 그곳의 여름 방학 프로그램에
참가했다.
(5) 사진 수업에서 다른 학생들보다 자신의 재능이 더 뛰어나다고
생각했다.
[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The McDonald’s restaurants that are located across the
United States ― and, increasingly, the world ― have a
significance that goes far beyond the convenience of quick
hamburgers, milk shakes, and salads. As sociologist George
Ritzer says, our everyday lives are being ‘McDonaldized.’
The McDonaldization of society does not refer just to
the robotlike assembly of food. This term refers to the
standardization of everyday life, a process that is transforming
our lives. Want to do some shopping? Shopping malls offer
one-stop shopping in controlled environments. Planning a
trip? Travel agencies offer ‘package’ tours. They will
transport middle-class Americans to ten European capitals
in fourteen days. All visitors experience the same hotels,
restaurants, and other scheduled sites.
Efficiency brings dependability. You can expect your
burger and fries to taste the same whether you buy them
in Los Angeles or Beijing. Although efficiency also lowers
prices, it does come at a cost. Predictability washes away
spontaneity, changing the quality of our lives. It produces
a sameness, a bland version of what used to be unique
experiences. In my own travels, for example, had I taken
packaged tours I never would have had the eye-opening
experiences that have added so much to my appreciation of
human diversity. For good or bad, our lives are being
McDonaldized, and the predictability of packaged settings
seems to be our social destiny. Our coming prepackaged
society will be , of course. But it also means
that we will be trapped in the ‘iron cage’ of bureaucracy
― just as Weber warned would happen.
49. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) Development of the Tourism Industry
(2) McDonaldization: A Societal Trend
(3) Packaged Tours: Advantages and Disadvantages
(4) Efficiency of Franchised Restaurants
(5) How to Increase Predictability of Society
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) unique (2) diverse (3) efficient
(4) spontaneous (5) unpredictable

2011년 수능

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 가방을 고르시오.
(1) (2) (3)
(4) (5)
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
(1) bored (2) curious (3) excited
(4) jealous (5) worried
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) 환자 간호 요령 (2) 퇴원 시 유의 사항
(3) 응급 상황 대처 방법 (4) 정기 건강 검진의 중요성
(5) 병원 서비스 개선 계획
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
(1) to buy basketball tickets
(2) to analyze the test results
(3) to check the gym schedule
(4) to bring a referee for the game
(5) to prepare snacks and beverages
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
(1) $ 36 (2) $ 40 (3) $ 45 (4) $ 50 (5) $ 55
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) 철저한 개인 위생 관리를 당부하려고
(2) 유행성 질병 예방 대책을 촉구하려고
(3) 다양한 감정 표현 방법을 소개하려고
(4) 즐거운 여가 활동의 중요성을 강조하려고
(5) 웃음이 신체에 미치는 영향을 설명하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) 가족 사진 찍어 주기 (2) 과학 숙제 도와 주기
(3) 수업 자료 복사해 주기 (4) 생일 선물 골라 주기
(5) 도서관에 책 반납해 주기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
(1) 녹음실 (2) 운동장 (3) 영화관
(4) 주차장 (5) 진료실
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
(1) 신문 기자 - 소설가 (2) 서점 직원 - 고객
(3) 도서관 사서 - 학생 (4) 택배 기사 - 경비원
(5) 여행사 직원 - 손님
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
(1) 연설문 검토하기 (2) 연설문 출력하기
(3) 포스터 게시하기 (4) 포스터 만들기
(5) 보고서 작성하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 정수기
모델을 고르시오.
12. 다음을 듣고, Chicago Student Exchange Program에 관한
내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
(1) 참가 학생들은 6개월 동안 Chicago에 머무르게 된다.
(2) 수업 시간은 오전 9시부터 오후 4시까지이다.
(3) 학교에서 교통편은 제공하지만, 점심은 제공하지 않는다.
(4) 주말에 학생들은 다양한 야외 활동을 즐길 수 있다.
(5) 학생 선발은 면접을 통해 이루어진다.
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
(1) I hope you’ll understand money doesn’t matter.
(2) It doesn’t sound easy, but it must be rewarding.
(3) More and more people enjoy hiking these days.
(4) I’m glad I can work with you at the same company.
(5) It’s a good idea to have a picnic at the nearby park.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
(1) I agree with you. Practice makes perfect.
(2) You’re right. I’ll go see a doctor right away.
(3) But it’s the only way you can keep playing the piano.
(4) Congratulations! You won first place in the competition!
(5) I’m delighted you’re fully recovered from your illness.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
(1) Don’t worry. It’s not your fault.
(2) Would you teach me how to read Chinese?
(3) I’m very pleased to get this present from you.
(4) I’ll go with you when I backpack to China next time.
(5) Okay. I’ll try, but don’t blame me if I can’t figure it out.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jessica가 선생님에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Jessica:
(1) I think Tom needs some medical help.
(2) I’m sorry, but I have to go to the hospital.
(3) May I go to the bathroom, please?
(4) My condition couldn’t be better.
(5) What’s going to be on the exam tomorrow?
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지
의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
In this digital age, images are essential units of
information, and knowing how to use photography
effectively is more important than ever. Fortunately,
enrolling at the Hobbiton Institute of Photography is one
of the easiest, most cost-effective ways to take your
photography to the next level. You’ll be assigned a
personal adviser, have your work evaluated by experienced
experts, and receive insightful suggestions on how to
make it better. You’ll also learn to think on your feet
and develop the eye of a photographer. You can pursue
your passion with us, and your photography will never
be the same.
(1) 사진 전문 강사진을 소개하려고
(2) 사진 전문 교육 기관을 홍보하려고
(3) 디지털 사진 촬영 기법을 설명하려고
(4) 사진 분야 취업 정보를 제공하려고
(5) 디지털 사진술 활용을 권장하려고
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
One day in February 2009, Stephanie called Betty,
(1) her best friend, who was the only employee of her
business Best Wedding. Once again, they discussed the
company’s expenses and dwindling revenue. But this time,
Stephanie knew what she had to do. She gathered up her
courage and told (2) her friend and colleague: “I have to
make this work. I have to let (3) you go.” Betty was hurt
but wasn’t particularly surprised. In a businesslike fashion,
the two women began figuring out how to disengage.
Betty said she wanted to start her own event-planning
business, and Stephanie agreed to let (4) her keep her
existing clients, some photography, and documents and
forms they had developed together. (5) She also gave Betty
two months’ salary as severance pay.
* severance: 해직
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
On January 10, 1992, a ship (A) traveled / traveling
through rough seas lost 12 cargo containers, one of
which held 28,800 floating bath toys. Brightly colored
ducks, frogs, and turtles were set adrift in the middle of
the Pacific Ocean. After seven months, the first toys
made landfall on beaches near Sitka, Alaska, 3,540
kilometers from (B) what / where they were lost. Other
toys floated north and west along the Alaskan coast and
across the Bering Sea. Some toy animals stayed at sea
(C) even / very longer. They floated completely along the
North Pacific currents, ending up back in Sitka.
(A) (B) (C)
(1) traveled …… what …… even
(2) traveled …… what …… very
(3) traveling …… what …… even
(4) traveling …… where …… even
(5) traveling …… where …… very
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Researchers studied two mobile phone companies trying
to solve a technological problem. One company developed
what it called a ‘technology shelf,’ created by a small group
of engineers, on which (1) was placed possible technical
solutions that other teams might use in the future. It also
created an open-ended conversation among (2) its engineers
in which salespeople and designers were often included.
The boundaries among business units were deliberately
ambiguous because more than technical information was
needed (3) to get a feeling for the problem. However, the
other company proceeded with more seeming clarity and
discipline, (4) dividing the problem into its parts. Different
departments protected their territory. Individuals and teams,
competing with each other, stopped sharing information.
The two companies did eventually (5) solve the technological
problem, but the latter company had more difficulty than
the former.
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
During the 1997 Kyoto negotiations, Brazil made a
suggestion that has since become known as the Brazilian
Proposal. (1) Its idea was that countries should now share
the burden of emissions cuts according to how historically
responsible they were for the problem. (2) In other words,
we should calculate what concentration of greenhouse
gases each country has put into the atmosphere over time
and use those figures to allocate emissions cuts. (3) That
would mean, for instance, that countries such as Germany
and the United Kingdom, which have been emitting for
longer than most countries, would bear a larger share
than their current emissions implied. (4) Greenhouse gases
have been known to absorb heat and hold this heat in the
atmosphere, instead of reflecting it back into space. (5) It
would also mean that big emitters that had developed
their industries more recently, such as Australia, would
bear less of a share.
23. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
It started out like any other day. I had no idea that I
was in for one of the most terrifying experiences of my
life. I headed to the beach and jumped on my surfboard
and paddled out. I was about 150 yards off the beach,
when I felt a sudden chill in the air followed by an
uncomfortable stillness. Suddenly, I heard the lifeguard
scream, “Get out of the water!” There was a certain panic
in his voice that demanded attention. Then I saw something
approaching me in the water. It was big and gray, and
closing in on me fast. I tried to paddle back to shore but
my arms and legs were paralyzed.
(1) amused (2) ashamed (3) disappointed
(4) flattered (5) frightened
24. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many people use their cleverness to justify and excuse
themselves for the messiness of their workspaces. They
say things like, “I know where everything is.” Or they
say non-humorous things such as, “A clean desk is a
sign of a sick mind.” However, people who say they
know where everything is turn out to be using a large
amount of their mental capacity and creative energies
remembering where they placed things, rather than doing
the job. If they worked in a well-organized environment
for any length of time, they would be surprised at how
much more productive they were. If you have a tendency
to attempt to explain a messy desk or work area, challenge
yourself to work with a clean desk for an entire day.
The result will amaze you.
(1) 직원들의 사기 진작을 위해 유머 감각을 잃지 마라.
(2) 새로운 근무 환경에 빨리 적응하기 위해 노력하라.
(3) 지적 능력을 향상시키기 위해 창의성을 개발하라.
(4) 업무 편의를 위해 필요한 도구를 가까이 두어라.
(5) 생산성을 높이기 위해 주변 환경을 정돈하라.
[25～30] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
25. What you do in the 15 to 30 minutes after eating your
evening meal sends powerful signals to your metabolism.
You’ll set the stage for more vigor throughout the evening
hours along with a weight-loss benefit if you stay
after your meal. Among many possible activities, walking
is one of the easiest ways to get some minutes of exercise
after a meal. In fact, research shows that if you walk
after a meal, you may burn 15 percent more calories than
if you walk the same time, distance, and intensity on an
empty stomach.
(1) active (2) alone (3) full
(4) satisfied (5) silent
26. Interestingly, people are more overconfident when they
feel like they have control of the outcome ― even when
this is clearly not the case. For example, it is documented
that if people are asked to bet on whether a coin toss is
heads or tails, most bet larger amounts if the coin is yet to
be tossed. If the coin is tossed and the outcome is concealed,
people will offer lower amounts when asked for bets. People
act as if __________________________________________.
In this case, control of the outcome is clearly an illusion.
This perception occurs in investing, as well. Even without
information, people believe the stocks they own will
perform better than stocks they do not own. However,
ownership of a stock only gives the illusion of having
control of the performance of the stock. [3점]
(1) the amount of the bet will influence the outcome
(2) their involvement will somehow affect the outcome of the toss
(3) there is a parallel between a coin toss and stock investments
(4) their illusion will not disappear even after the coin is tossed
(5) they can predict the outcome with credible information
27. The truth is that everyone has a story. Every person
we meet has a story that can, in some way, inform us
and help us as we live the story of our own lives. When
we acknowledge this truth and begin to look at others as
________________________________, we open ourselves
up to new possibilities in our lives. In reality, the people
who are most different from us probably have the most
to teach us. The more we surround ourselves with people
who are the same as we are, who hold the same views,
and who share the same values, the greater the likelihood
that we will shrink as human beings rather than grow.
(1) rivals competing against us
(2) reliable guidelines for conformity
(3) potential sources of valuable information
(4) members of the same interest group
(5) attentive listeners of our life stories
28. Although there are numerous explanations for the fall
of the Roman empire, the deeper cause lies in the declining
fertility of its soil and the decrease in agricultural yields.
Italy was densely forested at the beginning of Roman
rule. By the end of the Roman Imperium, however, Italy
had been stripped of forest cover. The timber was sold
on the open market and the soil converted to crops and
pastureland. The cleared soil was rich in minerals and
nutrients and provided substantial production yields.
Unfortunately, deforestation left the soil exposed to harsh
weather. Wind blew across the barren landscapes and
water ran down from the mountaintops and slopes, taking
the soil with them. Overgrazing of livestock resulted in
further deterioration of the soil. Consequently, Rome’s
___________________ could not provide sufficient energy
to maintain its infrastructure and the welfare of its
citizens.
(1) dense forests
(2) climate changes
(3) irrigation system
(4) declining population
(5) agricultural production
29. The identical claim, expressed in two social contexts,
may have different qualifiers. When talking among
friends, you might say, “Lucé is the world’s finest
restaurant.” When speaking to a group of French chefs,
you might find yourself saying, “Lucé is an excellent
restaurant, comparable to some of the best in France.”
Why did you say it differently? Perhaps because you
expected a different critical scrutiny in the two groups.
Maybe because your was strong
enough for friends but not as strong among the most
knowledgeable. In each instance, you communicated the
extent to which you wanted to qualify your claim, to
guard yourself by restricting the extent to which you are
willing to be held accountable for the claim.
(1) desire to win friendship
(2) confidence in the claim
(3) appetite for French cuisine
(4) support for others’ opinions
(5) suspicion of popular beliefs
30. Often in social scientific practice, even where evidence
is used, it is not used in the correct way for adequate
scientific testing. In much of social science, evidence is
used only to affirm a particular theory ― to search for
the positive instances that uphold it. But these are easy
to find and lead to the familiar dilemma in the social
sciences where we have two conflicting theories, each of
which can claim positive empirical evidence in its support
but which come to opposite conclusions. How should we
decide between them? Here the scientific use of evidence
may help. For what is distinctive about science is the
search for negative instances ― the search for ways to
falsify a theory, rather than to confirm it. The real power
of scientific testability is negative, not positive. Testing
allows us not merely to confirm our theories but to
. [3점]
(1) ignore the evidence against them
(2) falsify them by using positive empirical evidence
(3) intensify the argument between conflicting theories
(4) weed out those that do not fit the evidence
(5) reject those that lack negative instances
31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The term euphemism derives from a Greek word meaning
‘to speak with good words’ and involves substituting a
more pleasant, less objectionable way of saying something
for a blunt or more direct way. Why do people use
euphemisms? They do so probably to help smooth out the
‘rough edges’ of life, to make the unbearable bearable
and the offensive inoffensive. (A) , euphemisms
can become dangerous when they are used to create
misperceptions of important issues. (B) , a politician
may indicate that one of his statements was ‘somewhat at
variance with the truth,’ meaning that he lied. Even more
serious examples include describing rotting slums as
‘substandard housing,’ making the miserable conditions
appear reasonable and the need for action less important.
(A) (B)
(1) However …… For example
(2) In short …… For example
(3) That is …… Similarly
(4) In addition …… Therefore
(5) Nevertheless …… Similarly
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Until the 1920’s, there were only three competitive
swimming strokes ─ freestyle, backstroke, and breaststroke ─
and each had specific rules that described how it was to
be performed. The rules of breaststroke (1) stated that
both arms must be pulled together underwater and then
recovered simultaneously back to the start of the pulling
position to begin the next stroke. Most people interpreted
this arm recovery to mean an (2) underwater recovery. In
the 1920’s, however, someone (3) challenged the rules and
reinterpreted this arm recovery to be an out-of-the-water
recovery. Since this new breaststroke was about 15%
(4) slower, people using the conventional version couldn’t
effectively compete. Something had to be done to solve
the problem. Finally, this new stroke ─ now known as
the ‘butterfly’ ─ won (5) recognition as the fourth swimming
stroke, and became an Olympic event in 1956.
33. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Even those of us who claim not to be materialistic
can’t help but form attachments to certain clothes. Like
fragments from old songs, clothes can (A) evoke / erase
both cherished and painful memories. A worn-thin dress
may hang in the back of a closet even though it hasn’t
been worn in years because the faint scent of pine that
lingers on it is all that remains of someone’s sixteenth
summer. A(n) (B) impractical / brand-new white scarf might
be pulled out of a donation bag at the last minute because
of the promise of elegance it once held for its owner.
And a ripped T-shirt might be (C) rescued / forgotten
from the dust rag bin long after the name of the rock
band once written across it has faded. Clothes document
personal history for us the same way that fossils chart
time for archaeologists.
(A) (B) (C)
(1) evoke …… impractical …… rescued
(2) evoke …… impractical …… forgotten
(3) evoke …… brand-new …… forgotten
(4) erase …… impractical …… rescued
(5) erase …… brand-new …… forgotten
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. Living things naturally return to a state of balance.
When we are disturbed by forces acting on us, our inner
machinery kicks in and returns us to a balanced state of
equilibrium. Homeostasis is the word we use to describe
the ability of an organism to maintain internal equilibrium
by adjusting its physiological processes. Most of the
systems in animal and human physiology are controlled
by homeostasis. We don’t like to be off balance. We tend
to keep things in a stable condition. This system operates
at all levels. Our blood stays the same temperature.
Except for extraordinary exceptions, when people find
ways to intervene using methods more powerful than our
tendency to equilibrium, our habits, behaviors, thoughts,
and our quality of life stay pretty much the same too.
(1) physical balance needed for mental equilibrium
(2) inner mechanisms to enhance the quality of life
(3) general tendency of organisms to keep equilibrium
(4) major differences in animal and human physiology
(5) biological processes resulting from habitual behaviors
35. All of us use the cultural knowledge we acquire as
members of our own society to organize our perception
and behavior. Most of us are also naive realists: we tend
to believe our culture mirrors a reality shared by
everyone. But cultures are different, and other people
rarely behave or interpret experience according to our
cultural plan. For example, an American anthropologist
attempted to tell the classic story of Hamlet to Tiv elders
in West Africa. She believed that human nature is pretty
much the same the whole world over; at least the general
plot and motivation of the great tragedy would always be
clear. But, at each turn in the story when she told it, the
Tiv interpreted the events and motives in Hamlet using
their own cultural knowledge. The result was a very
different version of the classic play.
(1) cultural differences in perception and interpretation
(2) tragic characteristics of classic West African plays
(3) the positive function of culture as a mirror of reality
(4) human nature and its role in developing culture
(5) the process of acquiring cultural knowledge
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
The graphs above show the percentage of world
electricity generation by sources of energy for 1971 and
2007. (1) According to the graphs, the primary source of
electricity generation in both 1971 and 2007 was coal
and peat, accounting for over 40% of the total electricity
generation. (2) Oil showed the biggest decrease in electricity
generation, which fell from 20.9% in 1971 to 5.6% in
2007. (3) The source that showed the biggest increase was
nuclear, which rose from 2.1% in 1971 to 13.8% in
2007. (4) In 1971, hydro was the second biggest source of
electricity generation, but in 2007, gas was the second
biggest, accounting for more than 20% of the total
electricity generation. (5) Besides coal and peat, hydro was
the only source that accounted for more than 20% of the
total electricity generation in both 1971 and 2007.
37. 1920년대 Everest 등반에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는
것은?
Marking the Nepal-Tibet border, Everest looms as a
three-sided pyramid of gleaming ice and dark rock. The
first eight expeditions to Everest were British, all of which
attempted the mountain from the northern, Tibetan, side ―
not because it presented the most obvious weakness in the
peak’s formidable defenses but because in 1921 the
Tibetan government opened its borders to foreigners, while
Nepal remained off limits. The first Everesters were obliged
to trek 400 miles from Darjeeling across the Tibetan plateau
to reach the foot of the mountain. Their knowledge of the
deadly effects of extreme altitude was limited and their
equipment was poor. Yet in 1924, a member of the third
British expedition, Edward Felix Norton, reached an elevation
of 28,126 feet ― just 900 feet below the summit ― before
being defeated by exhaustion and snow blindness. It was an
astounding achievement that was not surpassed for 28 years.
(1) 처음 여덟 팀의 등반대는 Nepal 쪽에서 등반을 시작했다.
(2) 최초의 등반대는 Tibet 고원 지대를 우회하여 산기슭에 도달
했다.
(3) 최초의 등반대는 극한 고도의 치명적 영향에 관한 지식이
충분했다.
(4) 1924년에 Edward Felix Norton이 정상의 900피트 아래
지점까지 올랐다.
(5) Edward Felix Norton의 등반 기록은 이듬해에 경신되었다.
38. Giorgio Vasari에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
Giorgio Vasari, the Italian painter, architect, and writer,
was born in Arezzo in 1511. He was considered to be more
successful as an architect than a painter. But what made
him truly famous was his book Lives of the Most Eminent
Painters, Sculptors and Architects (shortened as Lives). It is
not known exactly how many copies of the first edition of
Lives, published in 1550, were printed, but it earned Vasari
the praise of his peers. Then in a revised edition of Lives
in 1568, complete with portraits of the artists, he combined
biographical anecdotes with critical comment. Although the
revised edition overshadowed Vasari’s own achievements as
a painter and architect, it made him the most respected man
of the Italian art world. He was even knighted by Pope
Pius Ⅴ in 1571.
(1) Arezzo에서 태어난 이탈리아 화가, 건축가 겸 작가였다.
(2) Lives의 초판본으로 동료들로부터 칭송을 받았다.
(3) Lives의 개정판에 예술가들의 전기적 일화와 비평을 함께 실었다.
(4) Lives의 개정판으로 이탈리아 예술계에서 존경을 받지 못하게
되었다.
(5) 1571년에 교황으로부터 기사 작위를 받았다.
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. The good news is that it’s never too late to start building
up muscle strength, regardless of your age. Ideally, though,
it’s best to start in your mid-forties when muscle mass
starts to decline significantly. “Once you’ve started, it can
take just six weeks to see an improvement of up to 20
percent in your muscle capabilities,” says Dr. Ward. Studies
have found that intense programs of strength training can
help even weak older people double their strength, as well
as enable them to walk faster and climb stairs more easily.
And muscle isn’t all you gain ― strength training can help
combat osteoarthritis, depression, and risk factors for heart
disease and diabetes.
* osteoarthritis: 골관절염
(1) 근력 운동의 효과는 단기간에 얻기 힘들다.
(2) 근력 운동에 필요한 기초 체력을 길러야 한다.
(3) 40대 이후에는 성인병 예방에 주의를 기울여야 한다.
(4) 운동량은 연령에 따라 적절히 조절해야 한다.
(5) 근력 운동은 나이가 들어서도 건강에 유익하다.
40. Standard English allows access to certain educational
and economic opportunities, which is the primary reason
for teaching it. Students realize this when they interview
for a first job or when they plan for post-high school
education. So, what should teachers do when a student says,
“I ain’t got no pencil,” or brings some other nonstandard
dialect into the classroom? Opinions vary from ‘rejection
and correction’ to complete acceptance. The approach
most consistent with culturally responsive teaching is to
first accept the dialect and then build on it. For example,
when the student says, “I ain’t got no pencil,” the teacher
might say, “Oh, you don’t have a pencil. What should you
do, then?” Although results won’t be apparent immediately,
the long-range benefits ― both for language development
and attitudes toward school ― are worthwhile.
(1) 표준어 사용의 경제적 측면을 고려해야 한다.
(2) 비표준어 사용을 수용하면서 표준어를 교육해야 한다.
(3) 단기 효과를 얻을 수 있는 교수 학습법을 개발해야 한다.
(4) 면접에서 표준어를 사용하도록 취업 교육을 강화해야 한다.
(5) 비문법적 표현이 고착되지 않도록 지체 없이 교정해야 한다.
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. Emotional eaters manifest their problem in lots of
different ways. For many people, one of the classic signs
of emotional eating is night eating. Night eaters are often
eating in response to anxiety or to the emotional turmoil
they’ve experienced throughout the day. Boredom and
loneliness are also more likely to come to the surface
when the rush of the day is done and the night stretches
ahead. Sometimes emotional eating is a reaction to a
specific situation. You had a bad day at work. The kids
have been so demanding that you are completely worn
out. You and your significant other are fighting. It
doesn’t matter what the circumstances are; the end result
is that 99 times out of 100 you end up on the couch
with a bowl of chips or bag of cookies in your hand,
telling yourself it’s the only way you can relax.
* turmoil: 혼란
(1) Family Life and Eating Behavior
(2) Emotional Eating: Signs and Reasons
(3) Emotional Treatments for Night Eaters
(4) Relaxation: An Ingredient for Good Diet
(5) What You Eat Is What You Are!
42. Giving people the latitude and flexibility to use their
judgment and apply their talents rapidly accelerates
progress. Send a message of respect and inspire people to
be creative and use their individual talents toward the
goals of the enterprise. Empower people by letting them
know that you believe in them and allowing them to take
action. Trusting people and empowering them also allows
you to focus on the things you need to accomplish. Ellyn
McColgan says, “I used to say to people all the time, ‘I
can help you figure out just about any problem you
throw at me, but is that really what you want from me?’
They would look at me funny and say, ‘Not really.’ I
would say, ‘I think what you would like is to do a great
job and then give me an opportunity to say, ‘Great job!’’
Then they would respond, ‘Yes, that’s true.’”
(1) What Frustrates Employers Most?
(2) How to Hire a Competent Employee
(3) Empowering Employees Through Trust
(4) Talents: An Essential Factor in Life
(5) Mixed Roles Between Employers and Employees
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Do you worry about losing your good health? Do you
fear that crime, war, or terrorist attacks will disrupt the
economy and your security?
(A) It’s because television focuses on news that makes the
world seem like a more dangerous place than it actually
is. Afraid of the world that is portrayed on TV, people
stay in their homes with close family and do not build
bonds with their neighbors.
(B) These are legitimate concerns that many people share.
We live in difficult and uncertain times. But are these
fears real? Research shows that people who watch a lot
of news on television overestimate the threats to their
well-being. Why?
(C) Thus they become more vulnerable. Surrounding ourselves
with a wall of fear, however, is not the answer. The
only way to overcome this problem is to be more
connected to others, and this connection will reduce fear
and isolation.
(1) (A) - (C) - (B) (2) (B) - (A) - (C)
(3) (B) - (C) - (A) (4) (C) - (A) - (B)
(5) (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절
한 곳은?
The DNA extracted from these bits of whale skin not
only identifies the individuals in the group, but also
reveals their relationships to each other.
Sperm whales travel in social groups that cooperate to
defend and protect each other, and may even share
suckling of calves. ( (1) ) It is difficult to determine the
membership of these groups from sightings alone, because
of the practical difficulties of observing whale behavior,
most of which happens underwater. ( (2) ) To make
things even more difficult, sperm whales can travel across
entire oceans and can dive to a depth of a kilometer.
( (3) ) Biologists who study whale behavior generally
have to be content with hanging around in boats, waiting
for their subjects to surface. ( (4) ) But when they do
surface, in addition to taking photos which allow
individual whales to be identified, biologists can zip over
in worryingly small boats and pick up the bits of skin
that the whales leave behind on the surface when they
re-submerge. ( (5) ) This has allowed researchers to
describe sperm whale social groups in detail.
* sperm whale: 향유고래
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Mediation is a process that has much in common with
advocacy but is also crucially different. It parallels
advocacy in so far as it tends to involve a process of
negotiation, but differs in so far as mediation involves
adopting a neutral role between two opposing parties
rather than taking up the case of one party against
another. At times, particularly in very complex
situations, the processes of advocacy and mediation can
overlap, perhaps with very problematic results, as one
loses clarity over his or her role. It is therefore
important, if not essential, to maintain a clear focus in
undertaking advocacy or mediation in order to ensure
that the roles do not become blurred and therefore
potentially counterproductive. For example, a mediator
who ‘takes sides’ is likely to lose all credibility, as is
an advocate who seeks to adopt a neutral position.
󰀻
Although both deal with negotiation, a mediator needs
to maintain (A) and an advocate partiality in
order to (B) crossing over into each other’s role.
(A) (B)
(1) neutrality …… avoid
(2) neutrality …… encourage
(3) potentiality …… reinforce
(4) creativity …… facilitate
(5) creativity …… prevent
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
When I was a freshman in high school, I won second
prize in our local newspaper’s essay contest on the theme
of ‘future career.’ I wrote about wanting to become a
journalist. We had to collect our prizes at the local variety
store and, while waiting in line, a little notebook in the
stationery department caught my eye. (a) It was a black
and red hardcover book with the word ‘Record’ neatly
engraved in gold on the cover. I reasoned that since I
was going to be a journalist, I’d need a very special
notebook in which to write. So I bought (b) it.
(B)
Then during a serious illness when I was thirty-five, I
found the little notebook I had purchased twenty years
earlier. From my sick bed I noticed (c) it on a nearby
shelf. It was still blank but something told me to write
my deepest feelings and thoughts, my pain and fear, my
wishes and dreams, the words of my inner world. This
was my first ‘official’ journal. And the process of
journal-keeping through writing and drawing helped heal
me from a mysterious illness which had defied the
doctors and their medicines.
(C)
My life changed so much after that. I began listening
to my own feelings and inner wisdom. The insights I
gained through journal-keeping led me into a new career
as an art therapist and teacher of diary writing and drawing.
More importantly, I learned to play and enjoy life again.
For instance, several years after recovering from my
illness, I started skateboarding for the first time in my
life and loved (d) it. I’m grateful to that high school girl
that I was for having the sense to buy a little blank
book. I used it to save my life and to help others.
(D)
But I put the notebook away and promptly forgot about
(e) it and about becoming a journalist. Painting became
my great love. Upon graduating from high school, I went
to college as a fine art major and English minor. After
becoming a professional artist, marriage followed, then
the birth of two daughters. A career change came next
which led to teaching underprivileged young children in
Los Angeles. The years passed.
46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
(1) (B) - (D) - (C) (2) (C) - (B) - (D)
(3) (C) - (D) - (B) (4) (D) - (B) - (C)
(5) (D) - (C) - (B)
47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
(1) (a) (2) (b) (3) (c) (4) (d) (5) (e)
48. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
(1) 지역 신문사의 에세이 대회에서 2등 상을 탔다.
(2) 심한 병을 앓고 있었을 때 20년 전에 산 공책을 발견했다.
(3) 병이 나은 지 몇 년 후에 스케이트보딩을 처음으로 시작했다.
(4) 대학에서 미술을 전공하지는 않았다.
(5) 전문 화가가 된 후, 결혼을 했고 두 딸을 두었다.
[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Since the beginning of time, the mysterious nature of
dreaming has led people to believe that dreams were
messages from the other world. Dreams have been regarded
as prophetic communications which, when properly decoded,
would enable us to foretell the future. There is, however,
absolutely no scientific evidence for this theory. It is
certainly true that individuals who are concerned about a
traumatic event, such as the threat of the loss of a loved
one who is sick, will dream about that loved one more
than would otherwise be the case. If the dreamer then calls
and finds that the loved one has died, it is understandable
for him or her to assume that the dream was a premonition
of that death. But this is a mistake. It is simply a(n)
correspondence between a situation about
which one has intense concern and the occurrence of the
event that one fears.
To prove the existence of premonitory dreams, scientific
evidence must be obtained. We would need to do studies
in which individuals are sampled in terms of their dream
life and judges are asked to make correspondences between
these dream events and events that occurred in real life. A
problem that arises here is that individuals who believe in
premonitory dreams may give one or two striking examples
of ‘hits,’ but they never tell you how many of their
premonitory dreams ‘missed.’ To do a scientific study of
dream prophecy, we would need to establish some base of
how commonly correspondences occur between
dream and waking reality. Until we have that evidence,
it is better to believe that the assumption is false.
* premonitory: 예고의, 전조의
49. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) Why Do People Dream?
(2) Ways to Interpret Dreams
(3) Origin of Dream Prophecy
(4) Scientific History of Dreams
(5) Can Dreams Foretell the Future?
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 공통으로 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(1) close (2) coincidental (3) inevitable
(4) logical (5) scientific