1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I think reading newspapers is boring.
② No, they deliver the paper around 6 a.m.
③ Well, I’d prefer to read the news on paper.
④ I heard the printing ink is very harmful, though.
⑤ You owe me $100 for two months’ subscription.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That’s reasonable. I’ll take those glasses.
② Sure. You may go during the lunch break.
③ All right. You can play soccer after school.
④ It’s your fault. You need to pay the repair bill.
⑤ That’s too bad. You should have worked harder.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고
르시오.
① 도서관 후원 단체의 회원을 모집하려고
② 도서관 확장 공사의 일정을 공지하려고
③ 도서관의 헌책 나눔 행사를 홍보하려고
④ 도서관에 대한 정부 지원을 촉구하려고
⑤ 도서관의 평생 교육 프로그램을 안내하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 예습과 복습을 꾸준히 해야 한다.
② 지킬 수 있는 학습 계획을 세워야 한다.
③ 남을 가르치면서 더 많은 것을 배울 수 있다.
④ 풀이 과정을 적는 것이 수학 공부에 효율적이다.
⑤ 사실의 단순 암기보다 개념의 이해에 충실해야 한다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 건물 관리인–건물주
② 부동산 중개인–세입자
③ 이사 업체 직원–집주인
④ 가전제품 수리 기사–고객
⑤ 배달 업체 직원–꽃집 주인
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고
르시오.
①
②
④ ③
⑤
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 휴대 전화 방수 케이스 사기
② 여행 사진 인화 신청하기
③ 빌려준 텐트 찾아오기
④ 캠프장 위치 확인하기
⑤ 래프팅 예약하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 제주도 여행을 취소한 이유를 고르시오.
① 사촌과 함께 보낼 일정이 생겨서
② 계절 학기 수업을 수강해야 해서
③ 가족과 말레이시아에 가야 해서
④ 시간제 일자리를 구해야 해서
⑤ 콘서트 연습과 시간이 겹쳐서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $6 ② $8 ③ $10 ④ $12 ⑤ $14
10. 대화를 듣고, Kite Flying Competition에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 날짜 ② 장소 ③ 참가비
④ 심사 기준 ⑤ 상품
11. Spring Walking Day에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오.
① 학부모도 참가할 수 있다.
② 3월 마지막 토요일에 개최된다.
③ 교문에서 출발하여 5km를 걷는다.
④ 점심과 물이 무료로 제공된다.
⑤ 행사 당일에 참가 등록이 가능하다.
2017학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역 1
제 3 교시
영어 영역 2
2 8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 선택한 애완동물 운반
용 가방을 고르시오.
Pet Carriers
Model Foldable Size Color Price
① A ○ Small Gray $25
② B × Small Yellow $25
③ C ○ Medium Gray $30
④ D ○ Medium Yellow $30
⑤ E ○ Large Gray $35
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Wonderful choice! You won’t regret.
② Okay. The shipping is $3 per address.
③ Don’t worry. We’ll keep them for you.
④ I’m sorry. The last pair has just been sold.
⑤ Never mind. Let me call the store right away.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① You’re right. Then I should email the cards.
② I understand. I should make the cards myself.
③ Yeah. This would be a great birthday present.
④ Then, please drive them home after the party.
⑤ Not at all. I’ve already invited all my classmates.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Carla가 노신사에게 할 말로 가장 적
절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Carla:
① Do you have any specific model in mind?
② Then, could you tell me your budget range?
③ Everyone has a different taste, so I can’t tell.
④ If you get her these earphones, she’d be happy.
⑤ Headphones would be better for listening to music.
[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① selecting good vegetable seeds
② growing vegetables and fruits in pots
③ managing indoor humidity using plants
④ using sand to store vegetables and fruits
⑤ mixing sand and soil for a vegetable garden
17. 언급된 채소나 과일이 아닌 것은?
① carrots ② onions ③ potatoes ④ apples ⑤ pears
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
We hope you enjoyed your recent stay with Youth
Hostels Association. We are continually striving to
improve the services we offer to our guests and we
hope you will take the opportunity to inform us about
what you really think. Your feedback is important to us
and we would be grateful if you could spare a few
minutes to share your experience and opinions. Complete
the survey now and you will be entered into a FREE
monthly prize draw, and will have the chance to win
£200 worth of overnight vouchers to be used with your
next booking, at any Youth Hostel of your choice in
England and Wales. We appreciate your feedback.
① 경품 당첨 소식을 알리려고
② 예약 취소 불가를 통지하려고
③ 시설 훼손 비용을 청구하려고
④ 설문 조사 참여를 요청하려고
⑤ 숙박 시설 개장을 홍보하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Before I could get off my horse, I heard a disturbing
sound. Charlie heard it, too. He stopped abruptly and backed
quickly away from the sound. The rattling sound seemed to
echo down the river. As I turned my head, I caught a
glimpse of a brown and gray curled creature. The rattlesnake
was in position to strike. Fear gripped my heart and it
pounded furiously. My hands began to sweat and my legs
were trembling. I knew any slight movement might make the
deadly snake strike. I had only one choice: to get Charlie out
of danger. He had the same idea. He spun quickly, avoiding
the rattlesnake’s attack. As we reached a safe distance, my
heart rate began to slow to its regular rhythm. I patted
Charlie’s head and said, “Good boy. You saved my life.”
① frightened →relieved ② cheerful →upset
③ curious→disappointed ④ bored →excited
⑤ ashamed →grateful
20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Anyone who has tried to complete a jigsaw puzzle as the
clock ticked on toward a deadline knows that the more they
struggle to find the missing pieces, the harder it is to find
them. As soon as the clock stops, on the other hand, the
pieces virtually find each other. Why do the answers we
missed in an exam so often occur to us as soon as we turn
in the test? The answer, surely, is that we are trying too
hard. We are trying in an anxious or frustrated way, and not
surprisingly, this makes us tense up. This kind of trying
results from doubt. If we didn’t doubt our ability to perform
the task at hand, we wouldn’t need to try. You don’t “try” to
sit down and pick up the newspaper when you get home
from work, do you?
① 스트레스 유발 요인은 사람마다 다양하다.
② 적당한 긴장감은 집중력과 수행 속도를 향상한다.
③ 과도한 경쟁의식은 성급한 상황 판단을 부추긴다.
④ 적절한 휴식은 암기력을 향상하는 데 도움이 된다.
⑤ 자기 능력을 의심하면 과도하게 애쓰다가 일을 그르친다.
영어 영역 3
3 8
21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Deposits of oil lie under the frozen ground, or tundra, of
Alaska. Scientists and engineers have the technology needed
to get this oil out of the ground and move it across the
state through pipelines. Some people support drilling for
Alaska’s oil and moving it over the land in pipes. Other
people fear that digging into the tundra will be harmful to
the environment. They also fear that aboveground
pipelines
and spilled oil may harm the plants and animals in the
region. People who are opposed to drilling in Alaska don’t
want to take the benefits of having more oil with the
potential bad effects on the environment. Other people feel
that this tradeoff is worth the benefits it will give to the
community, or to the country as a whole. Still others say
new technology should be developed to reduce the dangers
to the environment before drilling is allowed.
① growing concerns of shrinking tundra
② geographical features of Alaskan tundra
③ conflicting views on drilling for Alaska’s oil
④ negative effects of oil spill on the environment
⑤ necessity of developing a new drilling technology
[22 ~ 23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. It has been estimated that every $1.00 spent on locally
produced foods returns (or circulates) $3.00 to $7.00 within
the community. Consumers buy produce and other goods
from local farmers, who buy farm supplies from local
businesses. Those businesses help to keep people in the
community employed, and, in turn, they spend their money
back in the community. This helps to encourage a thriving
community and increases the economic health of the region.
In addition, when farmers have direct access to consumers,
they are able to keep more of each dollar earned from a
sale, because the middleman
is eliminated. This increases
profits to producers and keeps their farms competitive with
the traditional retail chain stores. Purchasing local produce
not only improves the local economy, but it can also help
you stretch your food dollar and get highquality
fruits and
vegetables.
① Buy Locally, Create a Positive Chain Effect
② Are Locally Produced Foods High in Quality?
③ Purchase Fresh Foods, Make the World Green
④ The Local Farmer as a New Community Leader
⑤ Who Benefits from the Traditional Retail Chain?
23. Chalk and blackboards first made their mark in higher
education at elite military schools at the start of the 19th
century. Decades of war and geopolitical turmoil, combined
with sweeping changes to the scale and social organization of
governments, put a new premium on training large groups of
elite civil and military engineers. Mathematics was their
essential tool, and would also become a gateway subject for
efficiently sorting the best and brightest. Blackboards offered
instructors a way of working quickly and visibly in front of
the large groups of elite students who would now need to
know mathematics to a greater degree than ever before. They
also provided a setting for discipline, allowing those
instructors to examine and correct the work of many students
at once or in succession as they solved problems at the
board.
* turmoil: 혼란
① The Advancement of Elite Education Institutes
② Math Instructors: Mentors for Future Engineers
③ Mathematics: A Key Factor of Military Campaigns
④ Military Schools’ Roles in the Progress of Science
⑤ Blackboard: A Setting of Math Education for Elites
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The two pie charts above show the percentages of
foreigntrained
doctors who were working in the U.S. in 2013
and in the UK in 2014 by countries of origin. ①Doctors who
were trained in India represented the largest part both in the
U.S. and in the UK. ②In the U.S., the percentage of doctors
from the Caribbean islands and the EU countries took up more
than onetenth,
respectively. ③Doctors who were trained in
Africa accounted for a greater percentage in the UK than in
the U.S. ④The percentage of Pakistantrained
doctors in the
UK was more than double that in the U.S. ⑤In the U.S., the
percentage of doctors from the EU countries was lower than
that of the doctors from Canada and Mexico combined.
영어 영역 4
4 8
25. A. Manette Ansay에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
Awardwinning
author A. Manette Ansay was born in
Michigan in 1964, and grew up in Wisconsin. She was
talented at playing the piano when young and subsequently
trained as a concert pianist, attending the Peabody
Conservatory of Music. However, by the age of 21 she had to
give up the pursuit because of ill health, and by 23 she began
writing in need of another outlet for her creative energies.
Since then, she has become a bestselling
novelist. After her
time at Peabody, she worked for a while at the American
Museum of Natural History before returning to school at the
University of Maine to study anthropology. Since the 1990s,
her health has gradually stabilized, though there are still times
when even writing is challenging. Ansay went on to study and
work at Cornell University, and then became an assistant
professor at Vanderbilt University.
① 어린 시절에 피아노 연주에 재능이 있었다.
② 23세 무렵에 글을 쓰기 시작했다.
③ 미국 자연사 박물관에서 근무한 적이 있다.
④ 1990년대 이후 건강을 완전히 회복했다.
⑤ Vanderbilt 대학교의 조교수가 되었다.
26. King Clay Pottery Classes에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하는 것은?
King Clay Pottery Classes
Join our pottery classes and learn how to make pots
on the wheel. Each class consists of mixed levels of
students.
▪ Maximum class size: 10 students
▪ Schedule of classes
‒ Monday, Tuesday, Thursday: 7 p.m. ‒ 10 p.m.
‒ Wednesday: 1 p.m. ‒ 4 p.m.
‒ The studio is also open to all
students from 1 p.m. to 5 p.m.,
Saturday. There is no instruction
but you can work on whatever you want.
▪ Fee: $340 for a tenweek
session. This fee
includes Saturday studio time and all materials.
For more information, call Rebecca at (703) 543‒7654
or email her at theclayking@pottery2017.net.
① 동일한 수준의 수강생으로 반이 구성된다.
② 반은 최소 10명으로 구성된다.
③ 수요일에는 오후 7시부터 수업이 진행된다.
④ 토요일에도 강습을 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 수강료에 모든 재료비가 포함되어 있다.
27. Creatures of the Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하
지 않는 것은?
Creatures of the Night
Experience the wonders of night animals and their
amazing adaptations to nature at the annual Creatures of
the Night.
Friday, April 7th, 2017
5 p.m. until 10 p.m.
At Oak Forest Park (OFP)
▸ Enjoy exciting activities!
⦁Meet night creatures, such as owls, fireflies, and
more!
⦁Search for live bats and meet a bat ecologist.
⦁Watch a puppet theater.
⦁Take a guided night hike.
▸ Program fee
Full price: $8
OFP member: $6
Children 2 and under: free
Food will be available for purchase from a food truck.
Preregistration
is recommended!
① 오후 5시부터 오후 10시까지 진행된다.
② 박쥐 생태학자를 만날 수 있다.
③ 안내원이 동행하는 야간 하이킹이 있다.
④ OFP 회원은 참가비가 무료다.
⑤ 먹거리 트럭에서 음식을 구입할 수 있다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
One of the simplest and most effective ways to build
empathy in children ①is to let them play more on their
own. Unsupervised kids are not reluctant to tell one another
how they feel. In addition, children at play often take on
other roles, pretending to be Principal Walsh or Josh’s mom,
happily forcing ②themselves to imagine how someone else
thinks and feels. Unfortunately, free play is becoming rare.
Boston College research professor Peter Gray has
documented a continuous and ③ultimately dramatic decline
in children’s opportunities to play and explore in their own
chosen ways over the past fifty years in the United States
and other developed countries. The effects have been
especially ④damaged, he argues, to empathy. He concludes
that a decline of empathy and a rise in narcissism are
exactly ⑤what we would expect to see in children who
have little opportunity to play socially.
* empathy: 공감, 감정 이입
영어 영역 5
5 8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은? [3점]
Until the twentieth century, when composers began
experimenting freely with form and design, classical music
continued to follow basic rules relating to structure, not to
mention harmony. There still was room for (A) conformity/
individuality ―the great composers didn’t follow the rules,
but made the rules follow them―yet there was always a
fundamental proportion and logic behind the design. Even
after many of the rules were (B) maintained / overturned
by radical concepts in more recent times, composers, more
often than not, still organized their thoughts in ways that
produced an overall, unifying structure. That’s one reason
the atonal, incredibly complex works by Arnold Schönberg or
Karlheinz Stockhausen, to name two twentiethcentury
Modernists, are nonetheless (C) approachable / inaccessible .
The sounds might be very strange, but the results are still
decidedly classical in terms of organization.
* atonal: 무조의, 장조나 단조 등의 조를 따르지 않는
(A) (B) (C)
① conformity ···· maintained ··· approachable
② individuality ···· overturned ··· approachable
③ individuality ···· maintained ··· approachable
④ individuality ···· maintained ··· inaccessible
⑤ conformity ···· overturned ··· inaccessible
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Mrs. Smith, an intelligent woman in her sixties, has
suffered a massive stroke, affecting the back portions of her
right cerebral hemisphere. She has perfectly preserved
intelligence ―and humor. ①She sometimes complains to her
nurse that she has not put dessert or coffee on her tray.
When the nurse says, “But, it is right there, on the left,”
Mrs. Smith does not seem to understand what ②she says,
and does not look to the left. If the nurse gently turns Mrs.
Smith’s head, so that the dessert comes into sight, in the
preserved right half of ③her visual field, she says, “Oh,
there it is ―it wasn’t there before.” Actually, ④she has
totally lost the idea of “left.” Sometimes, she complains that
her portions are too small, but this is because she only eats
from the right half of the plate ―it does not occur to ⑤her
that it has a left half as well.
* cerebral hemisphere: 대뇌 반구
[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Recent research by Juliet Zhu and J. J. Argo suggests that
making subtle changes to the seating arrangements in
meetings can have an effect on what people choose to focus
their attention on. For example, the study found that circular
seating arrangements typically activated people’s need to
belong. As a result, they were more likely to focus on the
group’s collective objectives and be persuaded by messages
and proposals that highlighted group benefits rather than
benefits to any one individual. This effect was reversed,
however, when the seating arrangement was either angular
(think Lshaped)
or square. These seating arrangements
tended to activate people’s need for . As a
result, people were more responsive and reacted more
favorably to messages and proposals that were selforiented
and that allowed them to elevate their individualism.
① uniqueness ② safety ③ certainty
④ harmony ⑤ fairness
32. Much of the communication among chimps, as for animals
in general, is . One prime example
involved six young chimpanzees being studied in the 1970s
at the Delta Primate Research Center. One of them (we’ll
call him the “leader”) was introduced alone into an enclosure
and shown either a hidden source of food or a stuffed
snake. When this chimp was reunited with his fellows
outside the enclosure, they quickly resumed their normal
activities. There was no readily apparent sign that the leader
communicated his important knowledge to the other chimps.
Yet, when all six were allowed into the enclosure after the
leader had been shown food, the group headed straight for
the food. In the “snake” condition, the chimps all entered the
enclosure with the fur on their backs spiking up and
approached the danger zone with extreme caution, poking at
the leaf bed with sticks rather than with their hands. Either
the leader chimp had conveyed the information to the others,
or they were superbly attuned to his intentions. [3점]
* enclosure: 울타리로 둘러싸인 구역
① affected by their habitat
② too subtle for us to notice
③ rarely relationshiporiented
④ readily open to other species
⑤ surprisingly inferior to that of ours
영어 영역 6
6 8
33. Science and technology degrees are rewarding because
they are not designed . If you are
taking a highly specialized or vocational degree, you may
well know what career you are aiming for even before you
get to university, but for most science and technology
undergraduates university is an adventure in itself; ideas
about a career may be in your thoughts, but not completely
fixed. This gives you the advantage of knowing that you can
develop your career ideas as your course progresses, aware
that your degree will be of help to you in many areas of
work. It is perhaps with this in mind that science and
technology degree programs tend to be wide in scope and
flexible in approach. You might go to university to study
chemistry and find yourself doing some work within the
physics department. [3점]
① to represent a socially privileged status
② necessarily to be obtained in the university
③ to force you to follow the established scholars
④ only to grade you and make you feel frustrated
⑤ exclusively to get you into a job and keep you there
34. It’s a common practice during creativity seminars to give
participants a bag full of materials and then a problem to
solve. The materials are usually everyday items. Their use
is obvious to all. You are then to use those materials in
whatever ways you want to solve the problem; however,
there isn’t usually an obvious connection between the items
and your problem. For instance, maybe you have to figure
out how to create a communication device using a hammer,
tape, a hairbrush, and a bag of marbles. Most people have a
cognitive bias called functional fixedness that causes them to
see objects only in their normal context. The use of the
materials in their ordinary way will generally lead to no
workable solutions. The really exciting solutions come from
overcoming functional fixedness and using these everyday
items in new ways. To see the possibilities it is helpful to
take the viewpoint that . [3점]
① good tools make fine work
② nothing is what you think it is
③ having many options is not a blessing
④ the more we know, the more we want
⑤ deep learning is composed of small parts
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Parents play a huge role in every aspect of their children’s
life, even in the athletic aspect. ①It is a good thing for
parents to encourage and support their children in sports
which interest them, and this involves forming a good
relationship with the children’s coach. ②Parents and coaches
then should help hand in hand to foster a positive athletic
atmosphere for players. ③Coaches then should exert extra
effort in getting to know the parents of their players, and
by so doing, determine ways by which parents are willing to
help their children and the team in general. ④Competitive
sports should be avoided for children because they are more
likely to cause injuries. ⑤When parents and coaches have a
dialogue, they also learn more about each other’s
expectations and this leads to a better relationship between
them as well.
[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Government goods and services are, by and large,
distributed to groups of individuals through the use of
nonmarket rationing.
(A) The provision of national defense services is one strong
example of a good that is freely available to all and not
rationed by prices. In other cases, criteria such as
income, age, residence, or the payment of certain taxes
or charges are used to determine eligibility to receive
benefits.
(B) This means that government goods and services are not
made available to persons according to their willingness
to pay and their use is not rationed by prices. In some
cases, the services are available to all, with no direct
charge and no eligibility requirements.
(C) For example, to receive Social Security pensions in the
United States, individuals must be of a certain age, have
worked for a certain period of time (about 10 years)
while covered by Social Security, and must have paid
their share of Social Security taxes during that time.
[3점]
*rationing: 배분 **eligibility: 자격
① (A) - (C) -(B) ② (B)- (A) -(C)
③ (B) - (C) -(A) ④ (C)- (A) -(B)
⑤ (C) - (B) -(A)
영어 영역 7
7 8
37.
Why do meteorologists measure temperature in the
shade, rather than in the Sun? Aren’t people more
interested in the temperature in the Sun? Why don’t
they report it?
(A) So a thermometer in the Sun does not measure the air
temperature. On the other hand, the temperature of the
air in the shade is usually the same as that in the Sun.
So if you really want to know the temperature of the
sunlit air, measure it in the shade.
(B) However, if you put a thermometer in direct sunlight, the
redcolored
alcohol absorbs more sunlight than does the
transparent air. That makes the thermometer hotter than
the air. Of course, heat will flow from the thermometer
into the air, but if the Sun keeps shining on the
thermometer, the thermometer will always be hotter.
(C) It turns out that there is a good reason. Thermometers
are supposed to measure air temperature. When you
place them in a room, they eventually reach the same
temperature as the air.
*meteorologist: 기상학자
① (A) -(C) -(B) ② (B) - (A) -(C)
③ (B) -(C) -(A) ④ (C) - (A) -(B)
⑤ (C) -(B) -(A)
[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Twentyfive
years ago, The Road Less Traveled, by
psychiatrist M. Scott Peck, was just another
psychology/relationship book lying unnoticed on
bookstore shelves.
The movie industry is obviously affected by personal
recommendations. Even though well over a billion dollars is
spent every year on promoting new movies, people talking
to people is what really counts. ( ① ) According to Marvin
Antonowsky, head of marketing for Universal Pictures, “Word
of mouth is like wildfire.” ( ② ) This point is well
illustrated by the number of lowbudget
movies that have
succeeded with little or no advertising―and by the number
of bigbudget
flops. ( ③ ) Like the movies, book publishing
is another industry where lots of money is traditionally spent
on advertising but can’t begin to compete with the power of
friends telling friends about their discoveries. ( ④ ) Then a
few people read it, told their friends, and started a chain
reaction that is still going on. ( ⑤ ) Today, there are well
over two million copies in print.
*flop: 실패작
39.
An object smaller than the distance between waves is
a poor receiver for those waves.
Infrasound has the special characteristic of traveling well
in the ground or water; in fact, the waves of an earthquake
can be thought of as a form of infrasound. ( ① ) Because
sound travels much faster in ground than in air,
groundborne
vibrations, if perceived, can serve as an early
warning system, arriving well before airborne sound from the
same source arrives. ( ② ) Infrasound dissipates less
rapidly in air, making it ideal for longdistance
communication. ( ③ ) Perception of infrasound, however,
presents some specific problems. ( ④ ) Thus, infrasonic
receivers need to be large and tend to be found on the large
animals able to generate infrasound. ( ⑤ ) This is probably
the reason that infrasonic communication is used by only a
few animals, and the best understood infrasonic
communication system is the African elephants’.
*infrasound: 초저주파음 **dissipate: 소멸하다
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Getting firstrate
health care will always be quite
different from ordering something from an online
bookstore. We’re talking about the most precious part of
life ―one’s health ―not buying a book. But the common
thread is the power of information and individualization.
We are embarking on a time when each individual will
have all their own medical data and the computing power
to process it in the context of their own world. There
will be comprehensive medical information about a
person that is highly accessible, analyzable, and
transferable. This will set up a fundamental power shift,
putting the individual at center stage. No longer will MD
stand for medical deity. What have been called the six
most powerful words of the English language — “The
doctor will see you now” — will no longer be true. Indeed
you will still be seeing doctors, but the relationship will
be radically altered.
* embark on: ~에 들어가다 ** deity: 신(神)

The (A) of medical information will be greatly
improved, which will give more power to (B) than
ever before.
(A) (B)
① availability ···· patients
② availability ···· doctors
③ credibility ···· researchers
④ credibility ···· patients
⑤ productivity ···· doctors

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
A group of researchers designed a study about
recycling. Participants were told that they would be
evaluating a new brand of scissors. The process required
them to rate how good the scissors were at cutting out
shapes from a stack of 200 sheets of plain white paper.
Half the participants tested the scissors in a room where
there weren’t any recycling facilities, only a trash can.
The other half completed the task in a room where
recycling facilities were available in addition to a regular
trash can. The participants were purposely not given any
specific instructions about the sizes of the shapes or the
amount of paper that they should use in the task.
Instead they were simply told to dispose of any scraps
in the containers provided. Then they completed a “green
attitude” questionnaire that asked them about their
beliefs and attitudes toward the environment.
The results were quite simply startling. Participants
who evaluated the scissors when recycling facilities were
available used nearly three times more paper than the
group who didn’t have recycling facilities. Interestingly,
this increase in the use of resources occurred regardless
of how positive the participants’ “green attitudes” were,
as measured in the poststudy
questionnaire. So this
study demonstrated that the of paperrecycling
facilities caused people to actually use more paper.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① How Recycling Can Save the Economy
② Green Attitude: A Key to Sustainable Living
③ Why Evaluation Processes Must Be Objective
④ Paper and Steel: The Most Important Resources
⑤ Recycling Effort May Lead to an Unwanted Result
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① presence ② diversity ③ shortage
④ expense ⑤ standardization
[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Amy works as a receptionist for a small company. She
is perfect for her job and everyone around her office
loves (a) her. If a coworker has a personal problem, she
knows Amy will find the silver lining. If others have
good news, Amy is the first one with whom they’ll
share it. One day, Amy learned that her mother had
been diagnosed with a serious illness, so she took a
oneweek
leave of absence to be with her. During that
week, various people in the office took turns covering
for her.
(B)
Instead of seeing the company owner’s decision as a
relief, her coworkers gathered together and went to see
the owner. They told her that they didn’t want Amy to
be replaced and that they were willing to continue
covering for her. It took Amy’s mother another few
weeks to recover well enough for Amy to return to
work. During that time, her coworkers faithfully kept to
their word and covered for (b) her.
(C)
Unfortunately, Amy’s mother took a turn for the worse
and Amy was forced to take more time off. Before long,
(c) she ran out of paid leave and had to arrange to take
unpaid leave. After a month, the company’s owner felt
that the burden on the others in the office had become
too great. So she told the human resources department
to find Amy’s replacement. Soon word got around the
office that the company was looking to replace (d) her.
(D)
It was over those last few weeks that the owner
realized Amy was a great encourager for her employees.
In the many years since (e) she had founded the
company, she had never perceived any of the
receptionists who had worked there as irreplaceable. In
fact, she was so impressed by their dedication to Amy.
When Amy finally returned, the owner asked her into
her office and informed her that she was going to pay
her for the time she had been away.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) -(C) ② (C)- (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) -(B) ④ (D) - (B) -(C)
⑤ (D) -(C) -(B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Amy는 병에 걸린 어머니와 함께 있으려고 휴가를 냈다.
② 사장이 Amy를 교체하기로 한 결정에 동료들은 안도했다.
③ 어머니의 병세가 악화되어 Amy는 휴가를 연장해야 했다.
④ 사장은 Amy를 대체할 사람을 찾으라고 인사과에 말했다.
⑤ Amy가 돌아오자 사장은 Amy를 자신의 사무실로 불렀다.
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① He’s a gardener.
② She’s taking a picture.
③ It’s next to Central Zoo.
④ It’s open 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
⑤ I’m not free this weekend.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. You can teach me French later.
② Okay. I’ll make a reservation for five people.
③ No problem. They’ve already had lunch.
④ Of course. I really love these five books.
⑤ No. They didn’t come to the meeting.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 글쓰기 특강 참석을 독려하려고
② 효과적인 학습 전략을 소개하려고
③ 교내 수학 동아리 회원을 모집하려고
④ 온라인 설문 조사 일정을 공지하려고
⑤ 장학금 신청 방법 변경 사항을 안내하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 좋은 대본을 쓰려면 다양한 경험이 필요하다.
② 충분한 수면은 기억력 강화에 도움이 된다.
③ 반복적인 연습은 좋은 결과를 낳는다.
④ 건강을 위해서 일찍 일어나야 한다.
⑤ 실수는 성공의 밑거름이 된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 편집장 － 기자
② 서점 직원 － 학생
③ 인쇄소 직원 － 교사
④ 기계 수리공 － 경비원
⑤ 실내 디자이너 － 건축가
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 경고 방송하기 ② 게시판 만들기
③ 경고문 복사하기 ④ 사무실 청소하기
⑤ 불법 광고물 제거하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 청력이 나빠진 이유를 고르시오.
① 시끄러운 음악을 헤드폰을 쓰고 자주 들어서
② 도서관 공사 소음에 오랫동안 노출되어서
③ 과도한 업무에 대한 스트레스 때문에
④ 귓속에 이물질이 들어가서
⑤ 신체 노화로 인하여
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $54 ② $60 ③ $70 ④ $81 ⑤ $90
10. 대화를 듣고, ‘I Care, We Cure’ 행사에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 목적 ② 프로그램 ③ 장소
④ 초청 강사 ⑤ 입장료
11. Orange Tree Day Care Center에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치
하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① Green Oak Park 옆에 위치해 있다.
② 연령에 알맞은 다양한 활동을 제공한다.
③ 울타리가 있는 놀이터가 있다.
④ 점심 식사와 함께 신선한 과일을 제공한다.
⑤ 월요일부터 토요일까지 문을 연다.
2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2 8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 프로그램을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① I’ll record your performance with my phone.
② We’ll look for pictures of famous pianists.
③ I still have time to visit my uncle.
④ Your parents will get well soon.
⑤ The audience was not so big.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Sure. I often let my students go home early.
② Exactly. The video clip wasn’t helpful at all.
③ True. The professor was praised for his hard work.
④ Yeah. You should’ve gone to the lecture yesterday.
⑤ Right. We shouldn’t focus only on results when praising students.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Lucy가 Ben에게 할 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
Lucy:
① Sorry. Your flight is canceled due to bad weather.
② Come on. We need to leave for the airport now.
③ That’s okay. They arrived there on time.
④ Welcome. Thank you for flying with us.
⑤ Never mind. We can meet on Saturday.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① necessity of teaching hunting skills
② various ways to feed young animals
③ animal fathers’ dedication to parenting
④ sacrifice of animal mothers for their babies
⑤ importance of animal reproduction in the wild
17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① emperor penguin ② bullfrog
③ seahorse ④ giant water bug
⑤ sea catfish
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Mr. Stevens,
This is the chief editor of Novel Flash Fiction. As you
were informed by our staff last week, your short story will be
published in the December issue of Novel Flash Fiction. We
thought hearing how you came up with your story would be
meaningful to our readers. We would thus like to ask if you
could give a speech about your writing process. This speech
is expected to last for about an hour, and it will take place at
Star Bookstore downtown. You can choose a specific date
and time depending on your schedule. If you have any
questions, please contact us by e-mail at editors@nff.com.
We look forward to hearing how you wrote your story.
Sincerely,
Susanna Martinez
① 소설 창작 과정에 관한 강연을 요청하려고
② 강연 일정이 변경된 것에 대해 사과하려고
③ 새로 발간된 잡지의 정기 구독을 권유하려고
④ 출판물 편집에 관한 유의 사항을 안내하려고
⑤ 잘못된 기사 내용에 대해 정정을 요구하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Kate의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sipping coffee leisurely at a café, Kate was enjoying the
view of the Ponte Vecchio across the Arno. As an architect
and professor, she had taught about the historical significance
of the bridge to her students for years. A smile crept across
her face. It was her first time to actually see it in person.
Though not as old as the bridges of Rome, it was absolutely a
work of art. If the fleeing Nazis had destroyed it during World
War II, she would have never seen it. She was happy that she
could view the bridge in the twilight. Free from her daily
concerns, her mind began to wander from the unforgettable
views of the still Arno to all the unexpected but pleasant
encounters with other tourists. The trip was a rare liberating
experience. Kate felt that all her concerns had melted away.
① anxious and envious ② bored and indifferent
③ pleased and relaxed ④ confused and puzzled
⑤ disappointed and regretful
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sure, we’ve all heard the advice: “Follow your passion.” It’s
great when you hit the jackpot and find a career that melds your
strengths and passions, and where there is demand in the highly
competitive global marketplace of today. But if your goal is to get
a job at the end of the rainbow, you must distinguish between your
major, your passions, your strengths, and your career path. Your
strengths are more important than your passions. Studies show
that the best career choices tend to be grounded in things you’re
good at, more so than your interests and passions. Ideally, you want
to find a convergence of your strengths and your values with a
career path that is in demand. Interests can come and go. Your
strengths are your core, your hard-wired assets.
* meld: 섞다 ** convergence: 합류점
① 진로 계획을 세울 때 시장의 수요를 정확히 예측해야 한다.
② 직업을 선택할 때 본인의 강점을 우선적으로 고려해야 한다.
③ 자신의 분야에서 성공하기 위해서는 열정을 가져야 한다.
④ 원하는 직업을 갖기 위해서는 전공을 잘 선택해야 한다.
⑤ 취업을 준비할 때 다른 사람의 조언을 잘 들어야 한다.
 이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3 8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Parents are quick to inform friends and relatives as soon as
their infant holds her head up, reaches for objects, sits by
herself, and walks alone. Parental enthusiasm for these motor
accomplishments is not at all misplaced, for they are, indeed,
milestones of development. With each additional skill, babies
gain control over their bodies and the environment in a new
way. Infants who are able to sit alone are granted an entirely
different perspective on the world than are those who spend
much of their day on their backs or stomachs. Coordinated
reaching opens up a whole new avenue for exploration of
objects, and when babies can move about, their opportunities
for independent exploration and manipulation are multiplied.
No longer are they restricted to their immediate locale and to
objects that others place before them. As new ways of
controlling the environment are achieved, motor development
provides the infant with a growing sense of competence and
mastery, and it contributes in important ways to the infant’s
perceptual and cognitive understanding of the world.
* locale: 현장, 장소
① 유아의 운동 능력 발달은 유아의 다른 발달에 기여한다.
② 부모와의 정서적 교감은 유아의 지적 호기심을 자극한다.
③ 부모의 관심은 유아의 균형 있는 신체 발달에 필수적이다.
④ 주변 환경의 변화는 유아기 운동 능력 발달을 촉진한다.
⑤ 유아는 시행착오를 통해 공간 지각 능력을 발달시킨다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
It is a strategic and tactical mistake to give an offensive
position away to those who will use it to attack, criticize, and
blame. Since opponents will undoubtedly attack, criticize, and
blame, anyway, the advantages of being proactive, airing one’s
own “dirty laundry,” and “telling on oneself” are too significant
to ignore. Chief among these advantages is the ability to control
the first messages and how a story is first framed. That leaves
others having to respond to you instead of the other way around.
This approach is appropriately termed “stealing thunder.”
When an organization steals thunder, it breaks the news about
its own crisis before the crisis is discovered by the media or
other interested parties. In experimental research by Arpan and
Roskos-Ewoldsen, stealing thunder in a crisis situation, as
opposed to allowing the information to be first disclosed by
another party, resulted in substantially higher credibility
ratings. As significant, the authors found that “credibility
ratings associated with stealing thunder directly predicted
perceptions of the crisis as less severe.”
* dirty laundry: 치부, 수치스러운 일
① necessity of being cooperative in a crisis situation
② importance of taking the initiative in managing a crisis
③ problem of creating false stories to save an organization
④ significance of remaining silent in strengthening credibility
⑤ advantage of improving the corporate image through media
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
If you’ve ever seen the bank of flashing screens at a
broker’s desk, you have a sense of the information overload
they are up against. When deciding whether to invest in a
company, for example, they may take into account the people
at the helm; the current and potential size of its market; net
profits; and its past, present, and future stock value, among
other pieces of information. Weighing all of these factors can
take up so much of your working memory that it becomes
overwhelmed. Think of having piles and piles of papers,
sticky notes, and spreadsheets strewn about your desk, and
you get a picture of what’s going on inside the brain. When
information overloads working memory this way, it can make
brokers ― and the rest of us ― scrap all the strategizing and
analyses and go for emotional, or gut, decisions.
* at the helm: 실권을 가진 ** strewn: 표면을 뒤덮은
① How Information Overload Can Cloud Your Judgment
② Multitasking Increases Your Working Memory!
③ How to Prevent Information Flood
④ Do Flashing Screens Reduce Information Overload?
⑤ Emotional Judgment: The Secret of Successful Brokers
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows direct expenditures on education as a
percentage of GDP for the five OECD countries with the
highest percentages in 2011, by level of education. ① All the
five countries spent over seven percent of their GDP on direct
expenditures on education for all institutions combined. ② Of
the five countries, Denmark spent the highest percentage of GDP
for all institutions combined. ③ In terms of direct expenditures
on elementary and secondary education, New Zealand spent
the highest percentage of GDP among the five countries. ④ As
for direct expenditures on postsecondary education, Iceland
spent a higher percentage of GDP than the other four countries.
⑤ Compared with the Republic of Korea, Israel spent a lower
percentage of GDP on postsecondary education.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4 8
25. Albert C. Barnes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Born into a working-class family in 1872, Albert C. Barnes
grew up in Philadelphia. He became interested in art when he
became friends with future artist William Glackens in high
school. He earned a medical degree from the University of
Pennsylvania and qualified as a doctor in 1892. Barnes
decided not to work as a doctor, and after further study he
entered the business world. In 1901, he invented the antiseptic
Argyrol with a German chemist and made a fortune. Using his
wealth, he began purchasing hundreds of paintings. In 1922,
he established the Barnes Foundation to promote the education
of fine arts. There he displayed his huge collection without
detailed explanation. He died in a car accident in 1951.
* antiseptic: 소독제, 방부제
① 1872년에 태어나 Philadelphia에서 성장했다.
② University of Pennsylvania에서 의학 학위를 받았다.
③ 독일인 화학자와 함께 Argyrol을 발명하였다.
④ 미술 교육을 장려하기 위해 Barnes Foundation을 설립했다.
⑤ 자세한 설명과 함께 소장품을 전시했다.
26. Mountaintop Yodeling Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
Mountaintop Yodeling Contest
Show off your yodeling skills with the backdrop of the
beautiful Alps.
∙Place: special outdoor stage set up at Mt. Billatus (2,545 m)
∙Time & Date: 2:00 p.m. on June 12, 2017
∙Registration (online only): until June 1 (www.yodel.net)
∙Requirements
- All contestants should sing a 2-minute yodel of their choice.
- All yodels should be sung either in French or in English.
∙Prizes
- 1st place: a round-trip airplane ticket to London
- 2nd place: a Swiss watch
* The contest will be canceled if the weather is unfavorable.
① Mt. Billatus에 설치된 특별 야외무대에서 열린다.
② 등록 기한은 6월 1일까지이다.
③ 프랑스어나 영어로 요들을 불러야 한다.
④ 2등 상품은 London 왕복 항공권이다.
⑤ 날씨가 좋지 않으면 취소된다.
27. Summerville Forest Trail Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
Summerville Forest Trail Tour
Just five miles away from the big city, you can enjoy
the huge variety of plants and wildlife at Summerville
Forest. We offer a trail tour every Saturday from June to
September. Come and join us!
Tickets
∙$10 (for 8 and older)
∙$5 (for children under 8)
* Snacks and water will be provided.
Tour Schedule
∙8:30 a.m.－9:00 a.m. Introduction to Summerville Forest
∙9:00a.m.－11:00 a.m. Trail Walking Tour
Reservations should be made online (www.summerville.net)
at least one week in advance of your visit.
① 6월부터 9월까지 매주 일요일에 진행된다.
② 8세 미만 아이들은 무료로 참가할 수 있다.
③ 간식과 물이 제공된다.
④ Summerville Forest에 대한 소개가 한 시간 동안 진행된다.
⑤ 온라인 예약은 방문 하루 전까지 해야 한다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Though most bees fill their days visiting flowers and
collecting pollen, some bees take advantage of the hard
work of others. These thieving bees sneak into the nest of an
① unsuspecting “normal” bee (known as the host), lay an egg
near the pollen mass being gathered by the host bee for her
own offspring, and then sneak back out. When the egg of the
thief hatches, it kills the host’s offspring and then eats the
pollen meant for ② its victim. Sometimes called brood
parasites, these bees are also referred to as cuckoo bees,
because they are similar to cuckoo birds, which lay an egg in
the nest of another bird and ③ leaves it for that bird to raise.
They are more ④ technically called cleptoparasites. Clepto
means “thief” in Greek, and the term cleptoparasite refers
specifically to an organism ⑤ that lives off another by
stealing its food. In this case the cleptoparasite feeds on the
host’s hard-earned pollen stores.
* brood parasite: (알을 대신 기르도록 하는) 탁란 동물
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5 8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
Some coaches erroneously believe that mental skills
training (MST) can only help perfect the performance of
highly skilled competitors. As a result, they shy away from
MST, (A) denying / rationalizing that because they are not
coaching elite athletes, mental skills training is less important.
It is true that mental skills become increasingly important at
high levels of competition. As athletes move up the competitive
ladder, they become more homogeneous in terms of physical
skills. In fact, at high levels of competition, all athletes have
the physical skills to be successful. Consequently, any small
difference in (B) physical / mental factors can play a huge
role in determining performance outcomes. However, we can
anticipate that personal growth and performance will progress
faster in young, developing athletes who are given mental
skills training than in athletes not exposed to MST. In fact, the
optimal time for introducing MST may be when athletes are
first beginning their sport. Introducing MST (C) early / later
in athletes’ careers may lay the foundation that will help them
develop to their full potential.
* homogeneous: 동질적인 ** optimal: 최적의
(A) (B) (C)
① denying …… physical …… later
② denying …… mental …… early
③ rationalizing …… physical …… early
④ rationalizing …… physical …… later
⑤ rationalizing …… mental …… early
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Medicine became big business with the expansion of new,
higher-cost treatments and the increased numbers of health
care providers in the United States. As more health care
providers entered the market, competition increased among
①them. Interestingly, the increase in competition led health
care providers to recommend more services to the persons
②they served. This phenomenon reflects a unique feature in
the health care industry ― provider-induced demand, which
allows health care providers to maintain ③their income even
as competition increases. Average consumers of health care
do not know how to diagnose ④ their medical conditions and
do not have a license to order services or prescribe
medications. So consumers rely on the knowledge of health
care providers to determine what services are needed, even
though ⑤ they stand to make more money by ordering more
services.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Interest in extremely long periods of time sets geology and
astronomy apart from other sciences. Geologists think in
terms of billions of years for the age of Earth and its oldest
rocks ― numbers that, like the national debt, are not easily
comprehended. Nevertheless, the
are important for environmental geologists because they
provide a way to measure human impacts on the natural
world. For example, we would like to know the rate of natural
soil formation from solid rock to determine whether topsoil
erosion from agriculture is too great. Likewise, understanding
how climate has changed over millions of years is vital to
properly assess current global warming trends. Clues to past
environmental change are well preserved in many different
kinds of rocks.
① time scales of geological activity
② global patterns in species diversity
③ regional differences in time perception
④ statistical methods for climate projections
⑤ criticisms of geological period classifications
32. Politics cannot be suppressed, whichever policy process is
employed and however sensitive and respectful of differences
it might be. In other words, there is no end to politics. It is
wrong to think that proper institutions, knowledge, methods
of consultation, or participatory mechanisms can make
disagreement go away. Theories of all sorts promote the view
that there are ways by which disagreement can be processed
or managed so as to make it disappear. The assumption
behind those theories is that disagreement is wrong and
consensus is the desirable state of things. In fact, consensus
rarely comes without some forms of subtle coercion and the
absence of fear in expressing a disagreement is a source of
genuine freedom. Debates cause disagreements to evolve,
often for the better, but a positively evolving debate does not
have to equal a reduction in disagreement. The suppression of
disagreement should never be made into a goal in political
deliberation. A defense is required against any suggestion that
. [3점]
* consensus: 합의 ** coercion: 강압
① political development results from the freedom of speech
② political disagreement is not the normal state of things
③ politics should not restrict any form of difference
④ freedom could be achieved only through tolerance
⑤ suppression could never be a desirable tool in politics
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6 8
33. To make plans for the future, the brain must have an ability
to take certain elements of prior experiences and reconfigure
them in a way that does not copy any actual past experience or
present reality exactly. To accomplish that, the organism must
go beyond the mere ability to form internal representations,
the models of the world outside. It must acquire the ability to
. We can argue that
tool-making, one of the fundamental distinguishing features of
primate cognition, depends on this ability, since a tool does
not exist in a ready-made form in the natural environment and
has to be imagined in order to be made. The neural machinery
for creating and holding ‘images of the future’ was a
necessary prerequisite for tool-making, and thus for launching
human civilization. [3점]
① mirror accurate images of the world outside
② manipulate and transform these models
③ visualize the present reality as it is
④ bring the models back from memory
⑤ identify and reproduce past experiences faithfully
34. Since life began in the oceans, most life, including freshwater
life, has a chemical composition more like the ocean than fresh
water. It appears that most freshwater life did not originate in fresh
water, but is secondarily adapted, having passed from ocean to
land and then back again to fresh water. As improbable as this
may seem, the bodily fluids of aquatic animals show a strong
similarity to oceans, and indeed, most studies of ion balance in
freshwater physiology document the complex regulatory
mechanisms by which fish, amphibians and invertebrates
attempt to .
It is these sorts of unexpected complexities and apparent
contradictions that make ecology so interesting. The idea of a
fish in a freshwater lake struggling to accumulate salts inside
its body to mimic the ocean reminds one of the other great
contradiction of the biosphere: plants are bathed in an
atmosphere composed of roughly three-quarters nitrogen, yet
their growth is frequently restricted by lack of nitrogen. [3점]
* amphibian: 양서류 ** invertebrate: 무척추동물
① maintain an inner ocean in spite of surrounding fresh water
② attain ion balance by removing salts from inside their body
③ return to the ocean to escape from their natural enemies
④ rebuild their external environment to obtain resources
⑤ change their physiology in accord with their surroundings
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Since the concept of a teddy bear is very obviously not a
genetically inherited trait, we can be confident that we are
looking at a cultural trait. However, it is a cultural trait that
seems to be under the guidance of another, genuinely
biological trait: the cues that attract us to babies (high
foreheads and small faces). ① Cute, baby-like features are
inherently appealing, producing a nurturing response in most
humans. ② Teddy bears that had a more baby-like appearance
― however slight this may have been initially ― were thus
more popular with customers. ③ Teddy bear manufacturers
obviously noticed which bears were selling best and so made
more of these and fewer of the less popular models, to
maximize their profits. ④ As a result, using animal images
for commercial purposes was faced with severe criticism from
animal rights activists. ⑤ In this way, the selection pressure
built up by the customers resulted in the evolution of a more
baby-like bear by the manufacturers.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
It takes time to develop and launch products. Consequently,
many companies know 6—12 months ahead of time that
they will be launching a new product.
(A) This marketing technique is called demand creation. It
involves creating a buzz about a new potentially
revolutionary nutrient or training technique through
publishing articles and/or books that stimulate the
reader’s interest. Once this is done, a new product is
launched.
(B) Over a series of issues, you begin to see more articles
discussing this new nutrient and potential to enhance
training and/or performance. Then, after 4—6 months, a
new product is coincidentally launched that contains the
ingredient that has been discussed in previous issues.
Books and supplement reviews have also been used as
vehicles to promote the sale of fitness and nutrition
products.
(C) In order to create interest in the product, companies will
often launch pre-market advertising campaigns. In the
nutrition industry, articles are often written discussing a
new nutrient under investigation.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7 8
37.
There’s a direct counterpart to pop music in the classical
song, more commonly called an “art song,” which does
not focus on the development of melodic material.
(A) But the pop song will rarely be sung and played exactly
as written; the singer is apt to embellish that vocal line to
give it a “styling,” just as the accompanist will fill out the
piano part to make it more interesting and personal. The
performers might change the original tempo and mood
completely.
(B) Both the pop song and the art song tend to follow
tried-and-true structural patterns. And both will be
published in the same way ― with a vocal line and a
basic piano part written out underneath.
(C) You won’t find such extremes of approach by the performers
of songs by Franz Schubert or Richard Strauss. These will
be performed note for note because both the vocal and
piano parts have been painstakingly written down by the
composer with an ear for how each relates to the other. [3점]
* embellish: 꾸미다 ** tried-and-true: 유효성이 증명된
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
The net effect of this was that, although customers
benefited, the banks lost out as their costs increased but
the total number of customers stayed the same.
In mature markets, breakthroughs that lead to a major
change in competitive positions and to the growth of the
market are rare. ( ① ) Because of this, competition becomes
a zero sum game in which one organization can only win at
the expense of others. ( ② ) However, where the degree of
competition is particularly intense a zero sum game can
quickly become a negative sum game, in that everyone in the
market is faced with additional costs. ( ③ ) As an example
of this, when one of the major high street banks in Britain
tried to gain a competitive advantage by opening on Saturday
mornings, it attracted a number of new customers who found
the traditional Monday-Friday bank opening hours to be a
constraint. ( ④ ) However, faced with a loss of customers,
the competition responded by opening on Saturdays as
well. ( ⑤ ) In essence, this proved to be a negative sum
game.
39.
Human beings discovered this art thousands of years ago, and
they have invented several devices to make it easier and faster.
In fiber processing the word ‘spinning’ means two quite
different things. ( ① ) One is the formation of individual
fibers by squeezing a liquid through one or more small openings
in a nozzle called a spinneret and letting it harden. ( ② ) Spiders
and silkworms have been spinning fibers in this way for millions
of years, but chemists and engineers learned the procedure from
them only about a century ago. ( ③ ) In the other kind of
spinning ― sometimes called throwing to prevent confusion
with the first kind ― two or more fibers are twisted together to
form a thread. ( ④ ) The ancient distaff and spindle are
examples that were replaced by the spinning wheel in the Middle
Ages. ( ⑤ ) Later came the spinning jenny, the water frame,
and Crompton’s mule ― spinning machines that became
symbols of the Industrial Revolution. [3점]
* distaff and spindle: 실을 감는 막대와 추
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
When considered in terms of evolutionary success, many
of the seemingly irrational choices that people make do not
seem so foolish after all. Most animals, including our
ancestors and modern-day capuchin monkeys, lived very
close to the margin of survival. Paleontologists who study
early human civilizations have uncovered evidence that our
ancestors faced frequent periods of drought and freezing.
When you are living on the verge of starvation, a slight
downturn in your food reserves makes a lot more difference
than a slight upturn. Anthropologists who study people still
living in hunter-gatherer societies have discovered that they
regularly make choices designed to produce not the best
opportunity for obtaining a hyperabundant supply of food but,
instead, the least danger of ending up with an insufficient
supply. In other words, people everywhere have a strong
motivation to avoid falling below the level that will feed
themselves and their families. If our ancestors hadn’t
agonized over losses and instead had taken too many chances
in going after the big gains, they’d have been more likely to
lose out and never become anyone’s ancestor.
* agonize: 괴로워하다, 고민하다
󰀻
Our ancestors gave priority to (A) minimum
resources rather than pursuing maximum gains, and that
was the rational choice for human (B) from an
evolutionary perspective.
(A) (B)
① securing …… freedom
② sharing …… interaction
③ identifying …… exploration
④ sharing …… prosperity
⑤ securing …… survival
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8 8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
According to many sociologists, the study of what our
society calls ‘art’ can only really progress if we drop the
highly specific and ideologically loaded terminology of ‘art’,
‘artworks’ and ‘artists’, and replace these with the more
neutral and less historically specific terms ‘cultural forms’,
‘cultural products’ and ‘cultural producers’. These cultural
products ― be they paintings, sculptures, forms of music or
whatever ― should be regarded as being made by certain
types of cultural producer, and as being used by particular
groups of people in particular ways in specific social
contexts. By using the more neutral term ‘cultural products’
for particular objects, and ‘cultural producers’ for the people
who make those objects, the sociologist seeks to break with a
view that she/he sees as having dominated the study of
cultural forms for too long, namely trying to understand
everything in terms of the category ‘art’. This is a category
that is too limited and context-specific to encompass all the
different cultural products that people in different societies
make and use. It is a term that is also too loaded to take at face
value and to use naively in study of our own society. Since it
is in the interests of certain social groups to define some
things as ‘art’ and others as not, the very term ‘art’ itself
cannot be uncritically used by the sociologist who wishes to
understand how and why such labelling processes occur.
Quite simply, then, in order to study cultural matters, many
sociologists believe one has to the terms ‘art’,
‘artwork’ and ‘artist’ as the basis for our analysis. Instead,
these terms become important objects of analysis themselves.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Art: A Means to Overcome a Cultural Gap
② Interpreting Culture In and Out of Context
③ Different Forms of Art in the World of Culture
④ Cultural Diversity: Cornerstones of Civilizations
⑤ Culture as a Basis of Understanding the Concept of Art
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① reject ② borrow ③ introduce
④ stress ⑤ revive
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Andrew steadied his eyes upon the black and white
squares. He thought awhile before pushing his knight to an
unbeatable position. Now Andrew was sure he had beaten
Timothy Tandon, the winner of the 2016 National Chess
Championship. Andrew, whom nobody had noticed before
the tournament this year, came to progress to the final match.
After enjoying this memorable victory, Andrew headed straight
to the nursing home where (a) his sick grandad was staying.
(B)
It was the day of the final match. That morning Andrew had
received a call from the nursing home informing him that
Grandad’s condition had become serious. The news played
upon Andrew’s mind as (b) he started to play. After several
fierce battles, Andrew’s concentration wavered for a moment.
His mind travelled to his grandad, who was in another battle
for his life. It was then that Andrew made a big mistake! The
mistake was a fatal one, and it was all over. (c) He had lost.
(C)
Andrew arrived at the nursing home in a gloomy mood, but
he was blessed with good news. His grandad was recovering.
Andrew was greatly delighted, but (d) he could not help being
disappointed in a corner of his mind. “I tried my best to fulfill
your dream but I couldn’t make it,” Andrew said in
disappointment. “That’s all right,” said Grandad. “The real
lesson of chess is learning how to tame your mind. See, my
mind has won the battle over my body. I will recover soon and
see you become champion one day in perfect health.” Andrew
was relieved and smiled with joy.
(D)
When Andrew reached the nursing home, Grandad was
sitting up in bed. “You won the semi-final?” (e) he asked,
offering up a weak smile. Andrew nodded his head. Indeed,
Andrew’s grandad was his chess master. As a kid, Andrew
liked to observe Grandad play chess and often predicted his
moves even before he began to move the pieces. “Andrew,”
said Grandad, inspired by his grandson’s superb victory, “you
are now all set to fulfill my dream. Tomorrow you will surely
win the National Chess Championship.”
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Andrew에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 2016 National Chess Championship 우승자에게 승리를 거두었다.
② 할아버지의 병세에 관한 전화를 받고 결승전에서 큰 실수를 했다.
③ 결승전에서 패배한 사실을 할아버지에게 알리지 않았다.
④ 할아버지로부터 체스가 주는 교훈에 관하여 들었다.
⑤ 어렸을 때 할아버지의 체스 게임을 즐겨 봤다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. I like group writing.
② No thanks. I’m full already.
③ Okay. Let’s go to the cafeteria.
④ Great. Let’s check the grammar now.
⑤ You’re right. I’d rather work at home.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Great. You really did a good job.
② Don’t worry. I voted for her, too.
③ Well done. That’s exactly what I meant.
④ Of course, you will. I have no doubt about it.
⑤ What a good idea! It’ll be fun to run together.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 학교 오케스트라 연주회를 알리려고
② 공연 연습 일정 변경을 공지하려고
③ 고전 음악 감상법을 소개하려고
④ 음악실 사용 규칙을 안내하려고
⑤ 교내 방송부 부원을 모집하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 산책은 창의적 사고에 도움이 된다.
② 과학 교육은 분석 능력을 증진시킨다.
③ 달리기는 스트레스 해소에 효과적이다.
④ 학력 신장을 위해서는 체력 관리가 중요하다.
⑤ 우선순위를 정하는 것은 일의 효율을 높인다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 얼음 조각가 － 호텔 지배인
② 메이크업 아티스트 － 오페라 가수
③ 의상 디자이너 － 피겨 스케이팅 선수
④ 특수 촬영 감독 － 시나리오 작가
⑤ 동화 작가 － 출판사 편집장
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 음악 파일 확인하기
② 졸업생 인터뷰하기
③ 비디오 편집하기
④ 마이크 점검하기
⑤ 컴퓨터 가져오기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자의 이사를 도와줄 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 회사 야유회에 참석해야 해서
② 발표 자료를 준비해야 해서
③ 친구 병문안을 가야 해서
④ 부모님을 방문해야 해서
⑤ 해외 출장을 가야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36 ② $45 ③ $50 ④ $63 ⑤ $70
10. 대화를 듣고, Rainbow Lunch Box에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 판매 장소 ② 종류 ③ 크기
④ 가격 ⑤ 배달 여부
11. 10th Special Lecture에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① Robinson 교수가 강연자이다.
② 강연 주제는 야간 빛 공해이다.
③ 10월 2일 오후 4시에 열릴 것이다.
④ 청중은 150명으로 제한된다.
⑤ 입장권은 사전 구매가 가능하다.
2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 찻주전자를
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Okay. Tell me the address of the store.
② Wow! That looks better than the original one.
③ Great. Thank you for having it repaired on time.
④ Terrific! Put my name on the waiting list, please.
⑤ Definitely. I want a refund for the vacuum cleaner.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I understand. Don’t blame Peter anymore.
② Perfect. I’ll ask him if he can take your place.
③ Thanks a million. The contest was a big success.
④ Absolutely. I’ll give you a hand with your speech.
⑤ Awesome. You can take him to the national finals.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Stephanie가 David에게 할 말로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Stephanie:
① Why don’t you major in art at university?
② I wish I had good presentation skills like you.
③ Would you join me for a visit to an art museum?
④ You should’ve come with me to the museum today.
⑤ It’s worth completing your assignments on your own.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① ways to update big data
② uses of big data in society
③ origin and history of big data
④ pros and cons of big data usage
⑤ limits of data analysis in business
17. 언급된 장소가 아닌 것은?
① playing fields ② schools ③ stores
④ hospitals ⑤ banks
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
* CPR(cardiopulmonary resuscitation) : 심폐 소생술
① 효과적인 긴급 구조 요령을 설명하려고
② 심폐 소생술 강좌를 교사에게 홍보하려고
③ 학교의 긴급 구조 교육 일정을 공지하려고
④ 심폐 소생술 강좌의 담당 강사를 모집하려고
⑤ 심폐 소생술 수강 교사의 만족도를 조사하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Lindsay의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
A tear rolled down Lindsay’s cheek. She thought she had
put her favorite toy, Blue Bunny, in her bag before school this
morning. She had ‘show and tell’ in class today, and she was
anxious. Her teacher, Mrs. Cline, might be angry that she had
forgotten to bring it. She quickly searched the classroom and
checked her bag one more time. Her precious Blue Bunny
was a gift from her father, who worked overseas. It was
nowhere to be found. Just then, Mrs. Cline appeared in the
doorway. “Mrs. Cline!” Lindsay cried. “I can’t find my toy to
show in class today. I’m sorry!” Mrs. Cline smiled gently. She
was holding the toy. “Oh, Mrs. Cline! Thank you. I thought I
had lost Blue Bunny!” Lindsay felt calm and comforted now
that she had her toy again.
① excited → confused ② jealous → relaxed
③ worried → relieved ④ pleased → stressed
⑤ joyful → upset
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Once you start to see praise for what it is ― and what it
does ― these constant little evaluative outbursts from adults
start to produce the same effect as fingernails being dragged
down a blackboard. You begin to root for a child to give his
teachers or parents a taste of their own treacle by turning
around to them and saying (in the same saccharine tone of
voice), “Good praising!” Still, it’s not an easy habit to break.
It can seem strange, at least at first, to stop praising; it can
feel as though you’re being chilly or withholding something.
But that, it soon becomes clear, suggests that we praise more
because we need to say it than because children need to hear
it. Whenever that’s true, it’s time to rethink what we’re doing.
What kids do need is unconditional support, love with no
strings attached. That’s not just different from praise ― it’s
the opposite of praise.
* treacle: 당밀, 달콤한 것
① 아이들을 칭찬하는 습관을 그만두어야 한다.
② 아이들의 눈높이에 맞는 조언을 해 주어야 한다.
③ 아이들의 행동에 대한 무조건적인 지지를 삼가야 한다.
④ 아이들에게 타인을 칭찬하는 습관을 길러 주어야 한다.
⑤ 아이들에게 감정을 솔직하게 표현하는 방법을 가르쳐야 한다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Dear Teachers,
We are pleased to introduce our company’s recently
launched emergency training program for teachers. Our
CPR class is the most common option for a school. We
make it easy for teachers to participate in CPR training at
a time to suit your school’s schedule. Our class offers you
full life-saving expertise that you can then use to deliver
vital support in emergencies. With the proper training,
you will be able to perform CPR quickly and effectively
and improve a sufferer’s chances of survival. To learn
more about our CPR course offerings, please visit our
website at www.thebestCPRedu.com.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
People sometimes make downward social comparisons ―
comparing themselves to inferior or worse-off others ― to feel
better about themselves. This is self-enhancement at work.
But what happens when the only available comparison target
we have is superior or better off than we are? Can
self-enhancement motives still be served in such situations?
Yes, they can, as captured by the self-evaluation maintenance
model. According to this theory, we shift between two
processes ― reflection and comparison ― in a way that lets us
maintain favorable self-views. In areas that are not especially
relevant to our self-definition, we engage in reflection,
whereby we flatter ourselves by association with others’
accomplishments. Suppose you care very little about your
own athletic skills, but when your friend scores the winning
goal during a critical soccer match, you beam with pride,
experience a boost to your self-esteem, and take delight in
her victory celebrations as if, by association, it were your
victory too.
* flatter : 치켜세우다, 아첨하다
① 타인과의 비교를 통해 자신에 대한 객관적 평가를 할 수 있다.
② 자기 분야와 관련 없는 사람들의 성공도 축하해 줄 필요가 있다.
③ 성취도가 낮은 사람들과의 비교는 자기발전에 도움이 되지 않는다.
④ 사람들은 성취도가 높은 사람과 자신을 비교하지 않는 경향이 있다.
⑤ 타인의 성취를 자신과 연결하여 긍정적인 자아상을 유지할 수 있다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Some psychologists believe that insight is the result of a
restructuring of a problem after a period of non-progress where
the person is believed to be too focused on past experience and
get stuck. A new manner to represent the problem is suddenly
discovered, leading to a different path to a solution heretofore
unpredicted. It has been claimed that no specific knowledge, or
experience is required to attain insight in the problem situation.
As a matter of fact, one should break away from experience
and let the mind wander freely. Nevertheless, experimental
studies have shown that insight is actually the result of
ordinary analytical thinking. The restructuring of a problem
can be caused by unsuccessful attempts in solving the problem,
leading to new information being brought in while the person
is thinking. The new information can contribute to a
completely different perspective in finding a solution, thus
producing the Aha! Experience.
* heretofore: 지금까지
① disadvantages of experience in creative thinking
② significance of analytical thinking in gaining insight
③ contribution of insight in forming a new perspective
④ necessity of separating insight from analytical thinking
⑤ difficulty of acquiring in-depth knowledge from experience
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
When consumers lack adequate information to make
informed choices, governments frequently step in to require
that firms provide information. In the United States, we are all
familiar with the mandatory nutritional information placed on
food products. The Securities and Exchange Commission that
monitors American stock markets forces firms to meet certain
reporting requirements before their stock can be listed on
exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange. Such
reporting helps ensure that private investors have reliable
information on which to base their investment decisions.
Often, however, these regulations do not work adequately, as
the Enron scandal in 2001 clearly illustrates. The oil trading
company Enron had cooked its books to overstate its
profitability in its mandated reports. One outcome of Enron’s
subsequent financial collapse was the introduction of new
regulations designed to improve the reliability of the
information that companies must provide to the public.
* mandatory : 의무적인 ** subsequent : (결과로서) 일어나는
① Financial Advice for Better Market Profitability
② The Emergence of New Business Opportunities
③ Ethical Stock Investment for Reliable Businesses
④ Disclosing Truth: The Push for Market Credibility
⑤ Inflated Figures: The Driving Force for Investment
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the number of multipurpose
industrial robots per 10,000 employees in 2011 for six selected
countries. ① All of the six countries have more multipurpose
industrial robots per 10,000 employees in automotive
industries than in all other industries. ② Among the countries
in the graph, Japan has the largest number of multipurpose
industrial robots per 10,000 employees in automotive
industries. ③While the Republic of Korea has the smallest
number of multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000
employees in automotive industries, it has the largest number
in all other industries. ④ Both the USA and the United
Kingdom have more than 600 units of multipurpose industrial
robots per 10,000 employees in automotive industries but
have fewer than 200 units in all other industries. ⑤ Among the
six countries in the graph, Japan, Italy, and Germany are the
top three countries for the number of multipurpose industrial
robots per 10,000 employees in automotive industries.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. brown tree snake에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
The brown tree snake has a large head with sticking-out
eyes. The head is distinct from the narrow neck. Its body
usually has a light brown background with a series of darker
markings or bands on it. The snake is about 38 centimeters
when it comes out of its egg, and usually reaches 1 to 2
meters long. This snake is infamous for causing the extinction
of the majority of native bird species in Guam. Shortly after
World War Ⅱ, the brown tree snake was accidentally brought
into Guam from its native range in the South Pacific,
probably as an unwanted passenger on a ship or plane. It is
not hunted or eaten by any other animals in Guam and is
therefore at the top of its food chain, which has led the snake
to increase dramatically in number.
① 큰 머리와 돌출된 눈을 가지고 있다.
② 일반적으로 몸 바탕색은 연한 갈색이다.
③ 알에서 나올 때 약 38센티미터이다.
④ 제2차 세계 대전 이전에 Guam으로 우연히 유입되었다.
⑤ Guam에서 먹이 사슬의 최상위에 있다.
26. Barrow High School Charity Collection Week에 관한 다음
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 지역 학생들을 돕기 위한 것이다.
② 의류, 가방, 책, 소형 전자 기기를 기부받는다.
③ 현금을 기부받는다.
④ 기부할 모든 물품은 상자에 넣어야 한다.
⑤ 9월 18일부터 기부를 받는다.
27. Best Booth Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는
것은?
① 참가비가 있다.
② 심사 기준 중에 디자인 독창성 항목이 있다.
③ 1등 상금은 2등 상금의 세 배이다.
④ 시상식은 10월 20일 금요일 오후 5시에 열린다.
⑤ 이메일로는 부스 등록을 받지 않는다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
The lack of real, direct experience in and with nature has
caused many children to regard the natural world as mere
abstraction, that fantastic, beautifully filmed place ① filled
with endangered rainforests and polar bears in peril. This
overstated, often fictionalized version of nature is no more
real ― and yet no less real ― to them than the everyday nature
right outside their doors, ② waits to be discovered in a child’s
way, at a child’s pace. Consider the University of Cambridge
study which found that a group of eight-year-old children was
able to identify ③ substantially more characters from animations
than common wildlife species. One wonders whether our
children’s inherent capacity to recognize, classify, and order
information about their environment ― abilities once essential
to our very survival ― is slowly devolving to facilitate life in
④ their increasingly virtualized world. It’s all part of ⑤ what
Robert Pyle first called “the extinction of experience.”
* peril: 위험 ** devolve : 퇴화하다
􀀣􀁂􀁓􀁓􀁐􀁘􀀁􀀩􀁊􀁈􀁉􀀁􀀴􀁄􀁉􀁐􀁐􀁍􀀁􀀤􀁉􀁂􀁓􀁊􀁕􀁚􀀁􀀤􀁐􀁍􀁍􀁆􀁄􀁕􀁊􀁐􀁏􀀁􀀸􀁆􀁆􀁌
Next week, we will be holding our school charity
collection to help local students. We welcome donations
of your gently-used items.
What to donate:
Clothes, bags, books, and small electronics
* No cash donations will be accepted.
How to donate:
Put all items into a box and write your name on it.
Leave your box at the collection point in our school gym.
When to donate:
From September 18 to September 22 (during normal
school hours)
Please try to remember to show your goodwill and
support! For more information, contact the school office
at 0093-1234-5678.
－ Gold Rose Flower Festival －
Best Booth Contest
The Best Booth Contest is one of the main events of
the Gold Rose Flower Festival. Participation in the
contest is free of charge, and the best-looking booths will
be chosen as winners. Please come and join in the fun!
Judging Standards
∙Use of this year’s “Fantasy” theme
∙Design originality
∙Votes received by visitors
Prizes
∙First place: $200
∙Second place: $100
∙Third place: $50
Contest Schedule
∙Judging: October 20－21 (Friday & Saturday) from
9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
∙Award ceremony: October 21 (Saturday) at 5:00 p.m.
Contest Registration
To register your booth, please email the festival manager
at mholden@bbcgrff.org.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
Why does the “pure” acting of the movies not seem
unnatural to the audience, who, after all, are accustomed in
real life to people whose expression is more or less indistinct?
Most people’s perception in these matters is not very sharp.
They are not in the habit of observing closely the play of
features of their fellow men ― either in real life or at the
movies. They are (A) disappointed / satisfied with grasping
the meaning of what they see. Thus, they often take in the
overemphasized expression of film actors more easily than any
that is too naturalistic. And as far as lovers of art are concerned,
they do not look at the movies for imitations of nature but for
art. They know that (B) artistic / real representation is always
explaining, refining, and making clear the object depicted.
Things that in real life are imperfectly realized, merely hinted
at, and entangled with other things appear in a work of art
complete, entire, and (C) free / inseparable from irrelevant
matters. This is also true of acting in film.
* entangle : 얽히게 하다
(A) (B) (C)
① disappointed …… artistic …… free
② disappointed …… real …… free
③ satisfied …… artistic …… inseparable
④ satisfied …… real …… inseparable
⑤ satisfied …… artistic …… free
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Most of us probably parent the way we were parented.
Louise, a mother who attended my seminars, shared how
① her mother dealt with sibling fighting. Louise said her
mother’s infamous threat was always, “If you kids don’t stop
fighting, ② I’m going to knock your three heads together!”
Louise and her siblings were always puzzled about the
specifics of how their mother would actually accomplish such
a task, which, thankfully, ③ she never attempted. But what
drove her mother to make this empty threat? Extreme
annoyance with the sibling arguments, probably. No doubt,
Louise’s mother had learned this threatening tactic from
④ her own mother, and, in the absence of any other parenting
tools she knew of, she said it to her own children, regardless
of whether it worked. If Louise had not learned the effective
parenting skills taught in the seminars, ⑤ she would probably
be using similarly ineffective threatening techniques with her
own children today!
* sibling: 형제(의), 자매(의)
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. One unspoken truth about creativity ― it isn’t about wild
talent so much as it is about . To find a few
ideas that work, you need to try a lot that don’t. It’s a pure
numbers game. Geniuses don’t necessarily have a higher
success rate than other creators; they simply do more ― and
they do a range of different things. They have more successes
and more failures. That goes for teams and companies too.
It’s impossible to generate a lot of good ideas without also
generating a lot of bad ideas. The thing about creativity is that
at the outset, you can’t tell which ideas will succeed and
which will fail. So the only thing you can do is try to fail
faster so that you can move onto the next idea.
* at the outset : 처음에
① sensitivity
② superiority
③ imagination
④ productivity
⑤ achievement
32. Let me spend a moment on the idea of adjusting to another
person’s mental orientation. What I mean is this. At any moment,
a person has a . The
person notices this rather than that, and she has feelings and
makes judgements about one rather than another aspect of
events. If she is hungry, for example, she may notice that a
shop is selling groceries; her friend may notice only that it sells
newspapers. If she is short of money, she may resent that the
fruit is overpriced; meanwhile her friend may feel tempted by
some juicy peaches. In one sense the two friends are
experiencing the same shop and its contents, but they are
having quite different experiences of that shop. A more
extreme case arises when one person comprehends things in a
peculiar and individual way, for instance, in mistaking the shop
for a cinema. [3점]
① desire to make better choices
② point of view similar to that of others
③ personal preference on where to shop
④ particular take on what is happening
⑤ tendency to stick to traditions
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. Externalization is the foundation from which many
narrative conversations are built. This requires a particular
shift in the use of language. Often externalizing conversations
involve tracing the influence of the problem in a child’s life
over time and how the problem has disempowered the child
by limiting his ability to see things in a different light. The
counsellor helps the child to change by deconstructing old
stories and reconstructing preferred stories about himself and
his life. To help the child to develop a new story, the
counsellor and child search for times when the problem has
not influenced the child or the child’s life and focus on the
different ways the child thought, felt and behaved. These
help the
child create a new and preferred story. As a new and preferred
story begins to emerge, it is important to assist the child to
hold on to, or stay connected to, the new story. [3점]
① exceptions to the problem story
② distances from the alternative story
③ problems that originate from the counsellor
④ efforts to combine old and new experiences
⑤ methods of linking the child’s stories to another’s
34. The narratives that people create to understand their
landscapes come to be viewed as marketable entities and a
source of income for residents. Landscapes with a strong
place identity have an advantage in marketing to tourists, as it
is relatively easy to compartmentalize and market their
narratives. Such places may have disadvantages as well,
however. If place identity is tied to a particular industry, local
residents may feel strongly attached to the definitions of place
that stem from involvement in that industry, and they may
in favor of one based
on a tourism industry. People rooted in landscape may feel
strong connections to other community members and may
resent the invasion of outsiders who they believe are different
and challenge their common identity. Finally, local residents
may feel that this process reduces their identities to mere
commercial transactions, and they may believe they sacrifice
what is unique and special about their place. [3점]
* entity: 실재 ** compartmentalize: 구획하다 *** transaction: 거래
① resist losing that identity
② stop persisting with the old tie
③ tolerate the shift of that industry
④ alienate themselves from that place
⑤ refuse the advantage of that industry
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
One of the hallmarks of evaluating the quality of a black tea
is by assessing how tightly the leaves are rolled. Generally,
higher-graded teas are teas with leaves that are tightly and
uniformly rolled. ① Lower-graded teas, on the other hand, are
teas with leaves that are loosely and inconsistently rolled.
②With that said, the tightness of the roll has more to do with
the steepability of a leaf than it does with the taste of a tea.
③ The rolling of leaves is done by machine or, sometimes, by
hand to break the cell walls of the leaves and release
essential oils. ④ Therefore, one should not evaluate the tea’s
drinkability or taste merely because its leaves are not tightly
rolled. ⑤ It is common to find that people prefer the taste of
looser rolled black teas over more expensive or more highly
graded black teas that have been tightly rolled.
* hallmark: 특징, 특질 ** steepability : (차를) 우려낼 수 있음
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
It has been said that eye movements are windows into
the mind, because where people look reveals what
environmental information they are attending to. However,
there is more to attention than just moving the eyes to look
at objects.
(A) You may have had this experience if you have been
reading a book and then suddenly become aware that
although you were moving your eyes across the page
and “reading” the words, you had no idea what you had
just read.
(B) Even though you were looking at the words, you
apparently were not paying attention. There is a mental
aspect of attention that involves processing that can
occur independently of eye movements.
(C) We can pay attention to things that are not directly in our
line of vision, as evidenced by the basketball player who
dribbles down court while paying attention to a teammate
off to the side, just before she throws a perfect pass
without looking. We can also look directly at something
without paying attention to it.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
Today the term artist is used to refer to a broad range of
creative individuals across the globe from both past and
present. This rather general usage erroneously suggests
that the concept or word “artist” existed in original contexts.
(A) Inventions, ideas, and discoveries have been credited to
the persons who originated them. This view is also at the
core of the definition of an “artist.” Artists are perceived
to establish a strong bond with their art to the point of
combining into one “entity.”
(B) In contrast to the diversity it is applied to, the meaning of
this term continues to be mostly based on Western views
and values. Since the fifteenth century, this tradition has
been concerned with recognizing individual achievements.
(C) Art history has reinforced this oneness: A painting by
Pablo Picasso is called “a Picasso.” This union between
artists and their work has determined the essential qualities
of an artist: originality, authorship, and authenticity. [3점]
* authenticity: 진정함, 확실성
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
But the examination of the accuracy of information
obtained in this manner is not a simple matter.
The one area in which the Internet could be considered an
aid to thinking is the rapid acquisition of new information.
( ① ) But this is more fictional than real. ( ② ) Yes, the
simple act of typing a few words into a search engine will
virtually instantaneously produce links related to the topic at
hand. ( ③ ) What one often gets is no more than abstract
summaries of lengthy articles. ( ④ ) As a consequence, I
suspect that the number of downloads of any given scientific
paper has little relevance to the number of times the entire
article has been read from beginning to end. ( ⑤ ) My advice
is that if you want to do some serious thinking, then you’d
better disconnect the Internet, phone, and television set and try
spending twenty-four hours in absolute solitude.
39.
But it is no light matter to quickly and correctly pen a long
and complicated composition.
There are many instances of rapid work on the part of the
great composers; and their facility and quickness of
composition causes great wonder and admiration. ( ① ) But
our admiration is often misdirected. ( ② ) When we hear of
some of the speedy writing of great works by Mozart or
Mendelssohn, we might think that this speed was of the
composing power as well as of pen, but, in fact, such was
seldom the case. ( ③ ) These great musicians generally did
their composition mentally without reference to pen or piano,
and simply postponed the unpleasant manual labor of
committing their music to paper until it became absolutely
necessary. ( ④ ) Then they got credit for incredible rapidity
of composition. ( ⑤ ) One has only to copy a piece of music
or to try to put into notes some piece of music previously
memorized, to realize this. [3점]
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The weakness of local networks lies in their
self-containment, for they lack input as well as outreach. In
a classic study of urban politics, Herbert Gans found that
neighborhoods with the highest levels of solidarity often
were unable to block unfavorable policies and programs for
lack of ties to possible allies elsewhere in the city. It was for
this reason that Gans referred to them as “urban villagers.”
As the opposite of local networks, cosmopolitan networks
offer little solidarity and have little capacity to comfort and
sustain members. But members benefit from a constant
flow of new information and from the great reach of their
influence, even if it tends to be somewhat lacking in
strength. Local networks tend to be small. In contrast,
cosmopolitan networks can be huge. Thus, while the
“urban villagers” lacked ties even to their local city
government, cosmopolitan network ties often lead into the
White House.
* ally: 동맹국, 협력자
󰀻
Unlike the “urban villagers,” whose (A) ties to the
outside restrict them within their boundaries, cosmopolitan
networks (B) from exposure to new information
and a more extensive range of relationships.
(A) (B)
① loose …… profit
② loose …… stem
③ loose …… withdraw
④ close …… profit
⑤ close …… stem
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
An ecosystem that is altered or damaged in some way will
be out of balance with the biome for that area. For example,
if the local biome is forest, but the trees have been removed
from one area, then the ecosystem is out of balance. The
natural tendency is for plant species to move into that area,
bringing the ecosystem back towards the biome state. The
spread of a species into a new area is called colonisation. It
can happen naturally only if there are ecologically healthy
ecosystems nearby to provide plant seeds. Once the
vegetation has started to recover, insects, birds and other
animals will travel into the newly regenerated area.
These processes of ecological colonisation can be
supported by environmental . For example,
we are currently seeing important changes in the way
agriculture is carried out in Britain. Rather than just
maximising food production, farming is becoming more
environmentally friendly, with the support of financial
subsidies. This new approach increases biological diversity
by conserving hedges and the wildflowers, insects, birds and
other animals that live on the land. A proportion of
agricultural land is left completely uncultivated so that
species can gradually colonise it. This provides a habitat for
a wider range of species. Leaving some farmland as
set-aside is also a way to decrease overall production when
that is economically desirable. Note that set-aside land is
more permanent than fallow land, which is usually left for
only a year. Colonisation is a slow process, taking place over
years or even decades.
* biome: 생물군계 ** subsidy : 보조(금) *** fallow: 휴경
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Giving Land Back to Nature for Ecological Balance
② Colonisation: Mother Nature’s Shame or Pride?
③ Broken Ecosystems: Mankind’s Misconduct
④ Is Set-Aside Land Economically Desirable?
⑤ The Paradox of Eco-Friendly Farming
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① assessment ② competition ③ constancy
④ forces ⑤ management
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
An important lesson to remember is that we should try to
see the positives in life even while we are stuck in the
middle of trouble. Riccardo, who was named after his father,
an immigrant from Mexico, learned this lesson at a young
age. Although the family called him Ricky, his father had his
own nickname for him: Good-for-Nothing. Why did the
elder Riccardo call (a) him that? Because Ricky hated
fishing.
(B)
The nation came to know Ricky as the most complete
player of his generation, and he was voted into the Hall of
Fame. And his father, the elder Riccardo, what did he think
about it? Though he had wanted all of his sons to join the
family business, he was finally proud of Ricky and respected
his accomplishments. Ricky held onto hope in one of the
most difficult moments of (b) his life and achieved
greatness.
(C)
Since these jobs were not fishing, his father saw no value
in them. Young Ricky hated fishing. Everything would be
fine if it were not fishing, he thought to himself. Soon, Ricky
began to follow his older brother who used to play sandlot
ball. For Ricky, playing baseball with (c) him was a way to
forget his hardship. Fortunately, Ricky was very good at it,
and was treated like a hero among his playmates. When
Ricky was sixteen, he decided to drop out of school to
become a baseball player. And by the time he was through
with baseball, (d) he had become a legend.
* sandlot ball: 동네야구
(D)
His father saw this very negatively, because he was a
fisherman. He loved the fishing business. So did all of his
sons, except for Good-for-Nothing Ricky. The boy did not
like being on the boat, and the smell of fish made him sick.
Instead, Ricky ― who was not afraid of hard work ―
delivered newspapers, shined shoes, worked in the office, and
even repaired nets. (e) His income went to the family. Even
so, his father was strongly dissatisfied with him and still
always said that he was good for nothing.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Ricky에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 아버지의 이름을 따서 Riccardo라고 이름 지어졌다.
② 야구 선수로 성공했지만 아버지가 자랑스러워하지 않았다.
③ 야구 선수가 되기 위해 학교를 그만두기로 결심했다.
④ 아버지의 직업이 어부였다.
⑤ 힘든 일을 두려워하지 않았다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1 8
 1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Not yet. I forgot to send it.
② Of course. You can have it.
③ Sorry. We’re sold out of pictures.
④ Right. You shouldn’t buy a book.
⑤ No, thanks. I don’t want an album.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll ask him if he’d like to.
② Too bad. He went back yesterday.
③ Exactly. I plan to visit Korea later.
④ No. I want to stay longer if possible.
⑤ Right. We haven’t been to Germany.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 스마트폰 사용 자제를 당부하려고
② 청취자의 문자 참여를 권유하려고
③ 프로그램 방송 시간 변경을 공지하려고
④ 라디오 앱의 새로운 기능을 소개하려고
⑤ 음원 불법 다운로드의 유해성을 경고하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 운동과 숙면은 밀접한 관계가 있다.
② 시골 생활은 건강한 삶에 도움이 된다.
③ 규칙적인 식습관은 장수의 필수 조건이다.
④ 야외 활동은 스트레스 해소에 효과적이다.
⑤ 가정의 화목은 가족 간의 대화에서 시작된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 시민 － 경찰관 ② 환자 － 간호사
③ 학생 － 소방관 ④ 고객 － 차량 정비사
⑤ 학부모 － 영양사
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 티셔츠 주문하기 ② 호텔 예약하기
③ 로고 디자인하기 ④ 출장 신청하기
⑤ 항공권 취소하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 영화를 보고 있는 이유를 고르시오.
① 맡은 배역을 더 잘 이해하고 싶어서
② 훌륭한 영화감독이 되고 싶어서
③ 좋아하는 장르의 작품이어서
④ 주연 배우들을 좋아해서
⑤ 작문 숙제를 해야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36 ② $45 ③ $54 ④ $60 ⑤ $63
10. 대화를 듣고, Winter Discovery Camp에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 참가 대상 ② 활동 내용 ③ 기간
④ 기념품 ⑤ 참가비
11. Global Design Conference에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① Chicago에서 매년 개최된다.
② 유명 디자이너들의 강연이 있을 것이다.
③ 100명의 디자이너가 제작한 작품들이 전시될 것이다.
④ 6월 20일에 시작한다.
⑤ 등록비는 환불이 가능하다.
2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지 1
제 3 교시 홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2 8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 재킷을 고르시오.
Blackhills Hiking Jackets
Model Price Pockets Waterproof Color
① A $ 40 3 ☓ brown
② B $ 55 4 ○ blue
③ C $ 65 5 ○ yellow
④ D $ 70 6 ☓ gray
⑤ E $ 85 6 ○ black
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I agree. The place was too crowded.
② Of course. It’s very warm downtown.
③ All right. Let’s go on a bus tour then.
④ Sure. Our last vacation was the best ever.
⑤ Yes. The hotel is within walking distance.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Thanks for understanding. I hope it won’t cause any trouble.
② Certainly. I was deeply touched when you sent the message.
③ Good news. The orchestra is still looking for new members.
④ You’re welcome. I did what I had to do for the orientation.
⑤ That’s right. I couldn’t have won the election without you.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, David가 Julia에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
David:
① We need to check what we did last year.
② Why don’t we cancel the program this year?
③ Let me assign this work to the other teachers.
④ How about joining the program after school?
⑤ Let’s ask the students what they prefer to do.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① relationship between music and civilization
② materials used to make musical instruments
③ trends in modern art around the world
④ ways to preserve ancient instruments
⑤ use of music for rest and relaxation
17. 언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① China ② Mongolia ③ Nigeria
④ Australia ⑤ Colombia
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 단체 관람 시 유의 사항을 안내하려고
② 교내 행사에 초청할 강사 추천을 부탁하려고
③ 프로그램 단체 예약이 가능한지를 문의하려고
④ 새로운 체험 학습 프로그램을 소개하려고
⑤ 견학 예정 인원수의 변경을 요청하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
The start of the boat tour was far from what I had expected.
None of the wildlife I saw was exotic. I could only see dull
gray rocks. It was also so hot and humid that I could not
enjoy the tour fully. However, as the boat slid into the Bay
Park Canal, all of a sudden my mother shouted, “Look at the
mangroves!” A whole new world came into sight. The
mangrove forest alongside the canal thrilled me as we entered
its cool shade. I was fascinated by the beautiful leaves and
flowers of the mangroves. But best of all, I was charmed by
the native birds, monkeys, and lizards moving among the
branches. “What a wonderful adventure!” I exclaimed.
* mangrove: 맹그로브(강가나 늪지에서 자라는 열대 나무)
① ashamed → relaxed ② disappointed → excited
③ delighted → confused ④ pleased → lonely
⑤ scared → relieved
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
At the 2015 Fortune Most Powerful Women Summit, Ginni
Rometty offered this advice: “When did you ever learn the
most in your life? What experience? I guarantee you’ll tell
me it was a time you felt at risk.” To become a better leader,
you have to step out of your comfort zone. You have to
challenge the conventional ways of doing things and search for
opportunities to innovate. Exercising leadership not only
requires you to challenge the organizational status quo but
also requires you to challenge your internal status quo. You
have to challenge yourself. You have to venture beyond the
boundaries of your current experience and explore new
territory. Those are the places where there are opportunities to
improve, innovate, experiment, and grow. Growth is always
at the edges, just outside the boundaries of where you are
right now.
* status quo: 현재 상태
① 지도자는 실현 가능한 목표를 설정해야 한다.
② 지도자는 새로운 제도를 적극적으로 도입해야 한다.
③ 지도자는 조직의 현재 상태를 철저히 분석해야 한다.
④ 지도자는 현재의 자신을 넘어서는 도전을 해야 한다.
⑤ 지도자는 기존의 방식과 새로운 방식을 조화시켜야 한다.
 이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Dear Ms. Diane Edwards,
 I am a teacher working at East End High School. I
have read from your notice that the East End Seaport
Museum is now offering a special program, the 2017
Bug Lighthouse Experience. The program would be a
great opportunity for our students to have fun and
experience something new. I estimate that 50 students
and teachers from our school would like to participate
in it. Would you please let me know if it is possible to
make a group reservation for the program for Saturday,
November 18? We don’t want to miss this great
opportunity. I look forward to hearing from you soon.
Best regards,
Joseph Loach
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3 8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One exercise in teamwork I do at a company retreat is to
put the group in a circle. At one particular retreat, there were
eight people in the circle, and I slowly handed tennis balls to
one person to start throwing around the circle. If N equals the
number of people in the circle, then the maximum number of
balls you can have in motion is N minus 1. Why? Because it’s
almost impossible to throw and catch at the same time. The
purpose of the exercise is to demonstrate the importance of an
individual’s action. People are much more concerned about
catching the ball than throwing it. What this demonstrates is
that it’s equally important to the success of the exercise that
the person you’re throwing to catches the ball as that you are
able to catch the ball. If you’re less concerned about how you
deliver information than with how you receive it, you’ll
ultimately fail at delegation. You have to be equally skilled at
both.
* delegation: 위임
① 구성원 간의 공통된 목표 의식이 협업의 필수 조건이다.
② 정확한 정보 이해는 신속한 업무 수행을 가능하게 한다.
③ 자유로운 의사소통 문화는 직무 만족도 향상에 기여한다.
④ 여가 활동을 함께하는 것도 협업의 효율성을 증가시킨다.
⑤ 협업에서는 정보를 전달하는 방식에도 능숙할 필요가 있다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sensory-specific satiety is defined as a decrease in appetite,
or the subjective liking for the food that is consumed, with
little change in the hedonics of uneaten food. As a result of
sensory-specific satiety, when people consume a variety of
foods, they tend to overeat. A greater variety of food leads
people to eat more than they would otherwise. So, being full
and feeling sated are separate matters. The recovery of
appetite or the motivation to eat is apparent to anyone who
has consumed a large meal and is quite full, and does not
require additional energy or nutrients to meet their daily
needs, but decides to consume additional calories after seeing
the dessert cart. Small changes in the sensory properties of
foods are sufficient to increase food intake. For example,
subjects who were presented with different shapes of pasta
showed increased hedonic ratings and increased energy
consumption relative to subjects eating only a single shape of
pasta.
* satiety: 포만(감) ** hedonics: 쾌락 *** sated: 충분히 만족한
① necessity of consuming a varied diet in daily life
② reasons for people’s rejection of unfamiliar foods
③ changes in people’s preference for basic food items
④ impact of food variety on the amount of food people consume
⑤ importance of maintaining food diversity to prevent overeating
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Individual authors and photographers have rights to their
intellectual property during their lifetimes, and their heirs
have rights for 70 years after the creator’s death, so any
publication less than 125 years old has to be checked for its
copyright status. The duration of copyright protection has
increased steadily over the years; the life-plus-70-years
standard was set by the Copyright Term Extension Act of
1998, which increased the 50-year limit established by the
1976 Copyright Act. Supporters of such legislation like to
defend these increases with tales of starving writers and their
impoverished descendants, but in reality the beneficiaries are
more likely to be transnational publishing companies. And
note that copyright laws serve a dual purpose. In addition to
protecting the rights of authors so as to encourage the
publication of new creative works, copyright is also supposed
to place reasonable time limits on those rights so that
outdated works may be incorporated into new creative efforts.
Therefore, the extended copyright protection frustrates new
creative endeavors such as including poetry and song lyrics
on Internet sites.
* heir: 상속인 ** legislation: 법률, 입법
① The Untold Origin of Copyright Protection
② Creativity Leaps with Longer Copyright Protection!
③ More Is Not Enough: No Limits to Copyright Coverage
④ Who Smiles at Copyright Protection, Writers or Publishers?
⑤ Does Extended Copyright Truly Enhance Protection and Creation?
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the sales of four types of ethical
produce in the UK in 2010 and 2015. ① In 2015, the sales of
each of the four types of ethical produce showed an increase
from the sales of its corresponding type in 2010. ② Among
the four types of ethical produce, the sales of Organic ranked
the highest in 2010 but ranked the second highest in 2015.
③ Among the four types of ethical produce, Rainforest
Alliance recorded the second highest sales in 2010 and
recorded the highest sales in 2015. ④ The sales of Fairtrade
in 2015 were twice as high as those in 2010. ⑤ In both 2010
and 2015, the sales of Vegetarian meat alternatives were the
lowest among the four types of ethical produce.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4 8
25. Jim Marshall에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The late photographer Jim Marshall is regarded as one of
the most celebrated photographers of the 20th century. He
holds the distinction of being the first and only photographer
to be presented with the Grammy Trustees Award. He started
as a professional photographer in 1959. He was given
unrivaled access to rock’s biggest artists, including the
Rolling Stones, Bob Dylan, and Ray Charles. He was the only
photographer granted backstage access for the Beatles’ final
full concert and also shot the Rolling Stones on their historic
1972 tour. He formed special bonds with the artists he worked
with and those relationships helped him capture some of his
most vivid and iconic imagery. Over a 50-year career, the
photographs he took appeared on more than 500 album
covers. He was passionate about his work up until the end. “I
have no kids,” he used to say. “My photographs are my
children.”
① Grammy Trustees Award가 수여된 최초이자 유일한 사진작가이다.
② 1959년에 직업 사진작가로 일하기 시작했다.
③ Rolling Stones의 역사적인 1972년 투어에서 그들을 촬영했다.
④ 함께 작업한 예술가들과 특별한 유대 관계를 맺지 않았다.
⑤ 500개가 넘는 앨범 커버에 그가 촬영한 사진들이 실렸다.
26. 2018 CVL Volleyball Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 고등학생을 대상으로 한다.
② 참가자들은 수준에 따라 훈련을 받을 것이다.
③ 오전에 연습 경기를 실시한다.
④ 참가자들은 배구공과 캠프 티셔츠를 받을 것이다.
⑤ 마지막 날에 대학 배구 선수들이 방문할 것이다.
27. Eugene Community Charity Fun Hike에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 올해의 기부금 전액은 어린이 도서관 공사비로 사용된다.
② 안전 교육은 오전 10시에 시작한다.
③ 각 참가자는 두 개의 코스를 선택할 수 있다.
④ 점심 식사가 제공된다.
⑤ 하이킹을 완료한 참가자들은 메달을 받을 것이다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Psychologists who study giving behavior ① have noticed
that some people give substantial amounts to one or two
charities, while others give small amounts to many charities.
Those who donate to one or two charities seek evidence about
what the charity is doing and ② what it is really having a
positive impact. If the evidence indicates that the charity is
really helping others, they make a substantial donation. Those
who give small amounts to many charities are not so
interested in whether what they are ③ doing helps others ─
psychologists call them warm glow givers. Knowing that they
are giving makes ④ them feel good, regardless of the impact
of their donation. In many cases the donation is so small ─
$10 or less ─ that if they stopped ⑤ to think, they would
realize that the cost of processing the donation is likely to
exceed any benefit it brings to the charity.
2018 CVL Volleyball Camp
The College Volleyball League (CVL) is hosting a camp
for high school students from January 23 to 27.
Training Program
After a brief skills test, participants will be trained
based on their levels.
∙Basic Level: serving, tossing, and spiking
∙Advanced Level: individual plays and team strategies
Daily Schedule
∙9 a.m.－11 a.m.: one-on-one skills training
∙1 p.m.－4 p.m.: practice game sessions
Note
∙Participation fee is $100.
∙Participants will receive a volleyball and a camp T-shirt.
∙College volleyball players will visit to offer advice to
participants on the final day of the camp.
For more information, visit our website at www.CVL.org.
All donations this year go toward purchasing
new books for the children’s library!
∙Date: Saturday, December 2, 2017
∙Place: Peterson National Park
∙Registration & Safety Instruction: 9:00 a.m.－9:30 a.m.
∙Start Time: 10:00 a.m.
How to Participate
∙Each participant should set a goal for donation by
choosing only one of the following courses:
 － Course A: 2 miles ($20)
 － Course B: 3 miles ($30)
 － Course C: 5 miles ($50 or more)
∙Participants should make their donations before the start.
What to Bring
∙Participants should bring comfortable shoes and
sunscreen.
∙Lunch is not provided, so please bring your own
refreshments.
Participants who complete their hike will receive a
medal. For more information, please call 234-567-1234.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5 8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Some prominent journalists say that archaeologists should
work with treasure hunters because treasure hunters have
accumulated valuable historical artifacts that can reveal
much about the past. But archaeologists are not asked to
cooperate with tomb robbers, who also have valuable
historical artifacts. The quest for profit and the search for
knowledge cannot coexist in archaeology because of the
① time factor. Rather incredibly, one archaeologist employed
by a treasure hunting firm said that as long as archaeologists
are given six months to study shipwrecked artifacts before
they are sold, no historical knowledge is ② found! On the
contrary, archaeologists and assistants from the INA (Institute
of Nautical Archaeology) needed more than a decade of
year-round conservation before they could even ③ catalog all
the finds from an eleventh-century AD wreck they had
excavated. Then, to interpret those finds, they had to ④ learn
Russian, Bulgarian, and Romanian, without which they would
never have learned the true nature of the site. Could
a “commercial archaeologist” have ⑤ waited more than a
decade or so before selling the finds?
* prominent: 저명한 ** excavate: 발굴하다
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Scott Adams, the creator of Dilbert, one of the most
successful comic strips of all time, says that two personal
letters dramatically changed his life. One night ① he was
watching a PBS-TV program about cartooning, when he
decided to write to the host of the show, Jack Cassady, to ask
for his advice about becoming a cartoonist. Much to ② his
surprise, he heard back from Cassady within a few weeks in
the form of a handwritten letter. The letter advised Adams not
to be discouraged if he received early rejections. Adams got
inspired and submitted some cartoons, but ③ he was quickly
rejected. Not following Cassady’s advice, ④ he became
discouraged, put his materials away, and decided to forget
cartooning as a career. About fifteen months later, he was
surprised to receive yet another letter from Cassady,
especially since he hadn’t thanked ⑤ him for his original
advice. He acted again on Cassady’s encouragement, but this
time he stuck with it and obviously hit it big.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Apocalypse Now, a film produced and directed by Francis
Ford Coppola, gained widespread popularity, and for good
reason. The film is an adaptation of Joseph Conrad’s novel
Heart of Darkness, which is set in the African Congo at the
end of the 19th century. Unlike the original novel, Apocalypse
Now is set in Vietnam and Cambodia during the Vietnam War.
The setting, time period, dialogue and other incidental details
are changed but the fundamental narrative and themes of
Apocalypse Now are the same as those of Heart of Darkness.
Both describe a physical journey, reflecting the central
character’s mental and spiritual journey, down a river to
confront the deranged Kurtz character, who represents the
worst aspects of civilisation. By giving Apocalypse Now a
setting that was contemporary at the time of its release,
audiences were able to experience and identify with its
themes more easily than they would have if the film had been
 . [3점]
* deranged: 제정신이 아닌
① a literal adaptation of the novel
② a source of inspiration for the novel
③ a faithful depiction of the Vietnam War
④ a vivid dramatisation of a psychological journey
⑤ a critical interpretation of contemporary civilisation
32. How many of the lunches that you ate over the last week
can you recall? Do you remember what you ate today? I hope
so. Yesterday? I bet it takes a moment’s effort. And what
about the day before yesterday? What about a week ago? It’s
not so much that your memory of last week’s lunch has
disappeared; if provided with the right cue, like where you
ate it, or whom you ate it with, you would likely recall what
had been on your plate. Rather, it’s difficult to remember last
week’s lunch because your brain has filed it away with all
the other lunches you’ve ever eaten as just another lunch.
When we try to recall something from a category that
includes as many instances as “lunch” or “wine,” many
memories compete for our attention. The memory of last
Wednesday’s lunch isn’t necessarily gone; it’s that you lack
 . But
a wine that talks: That’s unique. It’s a memory without rivals.
[3점]
① the channel to let it flow into the pool of ordinary memories
② the right hook to pull it out of a sea of lunchtime memories
③ the glue to attach it to just another lunch memory
④ the memory capacity to keep a box of sleeping memories
⑤ the sufficient number of competitors in a battle for attention
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6 8
33. In the less developed world, the percentage of the
population involved in agriculture is declining, but at the
same time, those remaining in agriculture are not benefiting
from technological advances. The typical scenario in the less
developed world is one in which a very few commercial
agriculturalists are technologically advanced while the vast
majority are incapable of competing. Indeed, this vast majority
 because
of larger global causes. As an example, in Kenya, farmers are
actively encouraged to grow export crops such as tea and
coffee at the expense of basic food production. The result is
that a staple crop, such as maize, is not being produced in a
sufficient amount. The essential argument here is that the
capitalist mode of production is affecting peasant production
in the less developed world in such a way as to limit the
production of staple foods, thus causing a food problem. [3점]
* staple: 주요한 ** maize: 옥수수 *** peasant: 소농(小農)
① have lost control over their own production
② have turned to technology for food production
③ have challenged the capitalist mode of production
④ have reduced their involvement in growing cash crops
⑤ have regained their competitiveness in the world market
34. Over the past 60 years, as mechanical processes have
replicated behaviors and talents we thought were unique to
humans, we’ve had to change our minds about what sets
us apart. As we invent more species of AI, we will be
forced to surrender more of what is supposedly unique
about humans. Each step of surrender ─ we are not the only
mind that can play chess, fly a plane, make music, or invent
a mathematical law ─ will be painful and sad. We’ll spend
the next three decades ─ indeed, perhaps the next century ─
in a permanent identity crisis, continually asking ourselves
what humans are good for. If we aren’t unique toolmakers,
or artists, or moral ethicists, then what, if anything, makes
us special? In the grandest irony of all, the greatest benefit
of an everyday, utilitarian AI will not be increased
productivity or an economics of abundance or a new way of
doing science ─ although all those will happen. The
greatest benefit of the arrival of artificial intelligence is that
 . [3점]
* replicate: 복제하다
① AIs will help define humanity
② humans could also be like AIs
③ humans will be liberated from hard labor
④ AIs could lead us in resolving moral dilemmas
⑤ AIs could compensate for a decline in human intelligence
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
In the context of SNS, media literacy has been argued to
be especially important “in order to make the users aware
of their rights when using SNS tools, and also help them
acquire or reinforce human rights values and develop the
behaviour necessary to respect other people’s rights and
freedoms”. ① With regard to peer-to-peer risks such as
bullying, this last element is of particular importance. ② This
relates to a basic principle that children are taught in the
offline world as well: ‘do not do to others what you would
not want others to do to you’. ③ Children’s SNS activities
should be encouraged when we help them accumulate
knowledge. ④ This should also be a golden rule with regard
to SNS, but for children and young people it is much more
difficult to estimate the consequences and potential serious
impact of their actions in this environment. ⑤ Hence, raising
awareness of children from a very early age about the
particular characteristics of SNS and the potential long-term
impact of a seemingly trivial act is crucial.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Most consumer magazines depend on subscriptions and
advertising. Subscriptions account for almost 90 percent
of total magazine circulation. Single-copy, or newsstand,
sales account for the rest.
(A) For example, the Columbia Journalism Review is
marketed toward professional journalists and its few
advertisements are news organizations, book publishers,
and others. A few magazines, like Consumer Reports,
work toward objectivity and therefore contain no
advertising.
(B) However, single-copy sales are important: they bring in
more revenue per magazine, because subscription prices
are typically at least 50 percent less than the price of
buying single issues.
(C) Further, potential readers explore a new magazine by
buying a single issue; all those insert cards with
subscription offers are included in magazines to
encourage you to subscribe. Some magazines are
distributed only by subscription. Professional or trade
magazines are specialized magazines and are often
published by professional associations. They usually
feature highly targeted advertising.
* revenue: 수입
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7 8
37.
To modern man disease is a biological phenomenon that
concerns him only as an individual and has no moral
implications. When he contracts influenza, he never
attributes this event to his behavior toward the tax
collector or his mother-in-law.
(A) Sometimes they may not strike the guilty person himself,
but rather one of his relatives or tribesmen, to whom
responsibility is extended. Disease, action that might
produce disease, and recovery from disease are,
therefore, of vital concern to the whole primitive
community.
(B) Disease, as a sanction against social misbehavior,
becomes one of the most important pillars of order in
such societies. It takes over, in many cases, the role
played by policemen, judges, and priests in modern
society.
(C) Among primitives, because of their supernaturalistic
theories, the prevailing moral point of view gives a
deeper meaning to disease. The gods who send disease
are usually angered by the moral offences of the
individual. [3점]
* sanction: 제재
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Experiments show that rats display an immediate liking
for salt the first time they experience a salt deficiency.
Both humans and rats have evolved taste preferences for
sweet foods, which provide rich sources of calories. A study
of food preferences among the Hadza hunter-gatherers of
Tanzania found that honey was the most highly preferred food
item, an item that has the highest caloric value. ( ① ) Human
newborn infants also show a strong preference for sweet
liquids. ( ② ) Both humans and rats dislike bitter and sour
foods, which tend to contain toxins. ( ③ ) They also
adaptively adjust their eating behavior in response to deficits
in water, calories, and salt. ( ④ ) They likewise increase
their intake of sweets and water when their energy and fluids
become depleted. ( ⑤ ) These appear to be specific evolved
mechanisms, designed to deal with the adaptive problem of
food selection, and coordinate consumption patterns with
physical needs.
* deficiency: 결핍 ** deplete: 고갈시키다
39.
It is postulated that such contamination may result from
airborne transport from remote power plants or municipal
incinerators.
An incident in Japan in the 1950s alerted the world to the
potential problems of organic mercury in fish. Factories were
discharging mercury into the waters of Minamata Bay, which
also harbored a commercial fishing industry. Mercury was being
bioaccumulated in the fish tissue and severe mercury poisoning
occurred in many people who consumed the fish. ( ① ) The
disabling neurological symptoms were subsequently called
Minamata disease. ( ② ) Control over direct discharge of
mercury from industrial operations is clearly needed for
prevention. ( ③ ) However, it is now recognized that traces of
mercury can appear in lakes far removed from any such
industrial discharge. ( ④ ) Strictly controlled emission standards
for such sources are needed to minimize this problem. ( ⑤ )
Fish advisories have been issued for many lakes in the United
States; these recommend limits on the number of times per
month particular species of fish should be consumed.
* postulate: 가정하다 ** incinerator: 소각로
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Time spent on on-line interaction with members of one’s
own, preselected community leaves less time available for
actual encounters with a wide variety of people. If physicists,
for example, were to concentrate on exchanging email and
electronic preprints with other physicists around the world
working in the same specialized subject area, they would
likely devote less time, and be less receptive to new ways of
looking at the world. Facilitating the voluntary construction
of highly homogeneous social networks of scientific
communication therefore allows individuals to filter the
potentially overwhelming flow of information. But the
result may be the tendency to overfilter it, thus eliminating
the diversity of the knowledge circulating and diminishing
the frequency of radically new ideas. In this regard, even a
journey through the stacks of a real library can be more
fruitful than a trip through today’s distributed virtual
archives, because it seems difficult to use the available
“search engines” to emulate efficiently the mixture of
predictable and surprising discoveries that typically result
from a physical shelf-search of an extensive library collection.
* homogeneous: 동종의 ** emulate: 따라 하다
󰀻
Focusing on on-line interaction with people who are
engaged in the same specialized area can (A)
potential sources of information and thus make it less
probable for (B) findings to happen.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① limit ……unexpected ② limit ……distorted
③ diversify ……misleading ④ diversify ……accidental
⑤ provide ……novel
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8 8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
In one sense, every character you create will be yourself.
You’ve never murdered, but your murderer’s rage will be
drawn from memories of your own extreme anger. Your love
scenes will contain hints of your own past kisses and sweet
moments. That scene in which your octogenarian feels
humiliated will draw on your experience of humiliation in
the eighth grade, even though the circumstances are totally
different and you’re not even consciously thinking about
your middle-school years. Our characters’ emotions, after
all, draw on our own emotions. Sometimes, however, you
will want to use your life more directly in your fiction,
dramatizing actual incidents. Charles Dickens used his
desperate experience as a child laborer in Victorian England
to write David Copperfield. Should you create a protagonist
based directly on yourself? The problem with this ─ and it
is a very large problem ─ is that almost no one can view
himself on the page. As the writer, you’re too
close to your own complicated makeup. It can thus be easier
and more effective to use a situation or incident from your
life but make it happen to a character who is not you. In fact,
that’s what authors largely have done. You can still, of
course, incorporate aspects of yourself: your love of
Beethoven, your quick temper, your soccer injuries. But by
applying your own experience to a different protagonist, you
can take advantage of your insider knowledge of the
situation, and yet gain an objectivity and control that the
original intense situation, by definition, did not have.
* octogenarian: 80대의 사람 ** protagonist: 주인공
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Simplicity: The Essence of Great Novels
② Protagonists: A Key to Understanding Novels
③ Keep Your Memories Away from Novel Writing!
④ Character Traits Borrowed from People You Know
⑤ A Better Way to Use Yourself in Character Creation
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① objectively ② intuitively ③ devotedly
④ emotionally ⑤ favorably
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
It was the first day of the new semester. Steve and Dave
were excited that they would be back at school again. They
rode their bicycles to school together that morning, as they
usually did. Dave had math on the first floor, and Steve was
on the second with history. On his way to the classroom,
Steve’s teacher came up to him to ask if (a) he wanted to run
for student president. Steve thought for a moment and
answered, “Sure, it’ll be a great experience.”
(B)
Steve won the election. Upon hearing the result, Dave went
over to Steve and congratulated (b) him, shaking his hand.
Steve could still see the disappointment burning in his eyes. It
wasn’t until later that evening, on the way home, that Dave
said apologetically, “I’m so sorry, Steve! This election hasn’t
damaged our friendship, has it?” “Of course not, Dave. We’re
friends as always!” Steve responded with a smile. As Steve
arrived home, his dad was proudly waiting for him and said,
“Congratulations on the win! How did Dave take it?” Steve
replied, “We’re fine now, best friends for life!” (c) His dad
laughed, “Sounds like you won two battles today!”
(C)
After class, Steve spotted Dave in the hallway and ran to him
excitedly, “I’ve got good news! I’m going for student president
and I think mine will be the only nomination.” Dave cleared his
throat and replied with surprise, “Actually, I’ve just registered
my name, too!” (d) He continued sharply, “Well, best of luck!
But don’t think you’ll win the election, Steve.” Dave walked
quickly away and from that moment on, there was an
uncomfortable air of tension between the two friends. Steve
tried to be friendly toward Dave, but he just didn’t seem to care.
(D)
When the election day came, Steve found that his bicycle
had a flat tire, so he started to run to school. Just as he
reached the end of the street, Dave’s dad, who was driving
Dave to school, pulled over to give him a ride. The dead
silence in the car made the drive painful. Noticing the bad
atmosphere, Dave’s dad said, “You know, only one of you
can win. You have known each other since birth. Don’t let
this election ruin your friendship. Try to be happy for each
other!” His words hit Dave hard. Looking at Steve, Dave felt
the need to apologize to (e) him later that day.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 개학 날 아침에 Steve와 Dave는 함께 등교했다.
② Steve는 학생회장으로 당선되었다.
③ Steve는 Dave에게 선거 출마 사실을 숨겼다.
④ Dave의 아버지는 학교로 뛰어가던 Steve를 차에 태워 주었다.
⑤ Dave의 아버지는 선거로 인해 우정을 잃지 말라고 충고했다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.