
2008학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지

제 3 교시       외국어(영어) 영역
 

성명


수험번호





3




          

◦먼저 문제지에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 기입하시오.
◦답안지에 수험 번호 및 답을 표기할 때는 반드시 ‘수험생이 지켜야 할 일’에 따라 표기하시오.
◦문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을 참고하시오. 1점과 3점 문항에만 점수가 표시되어 있습니다. 점수 표시가 없는 문항은 모두 2점씩입니다.


1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 물건을 고르시오.

 ①
 ②
 ③



 ④
 ⑤






2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① curious → indifferent	② excited → grateful
③ worried → confident	④ relieved → excited
⑤ anxious → frustrated

3. 다음을 듣고, 의인화된 ‘I’가 무엇인지 고르시오.
① straw	② paper	③ mouse
④ thumb	⑤ eye

4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to email his family
② to cook him pasta
③ to take his photos 
④ to order Italian food
⑤ to take him out for dinner

5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 오늘 지출한 총액을 고르시오.
① $120 	② $130	③ $140
④ $150	⑤ $160
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 동아리 회원을 모집하려고
② 학교 환경 개선을 요구하려고
③ 학생회 정기 총회를 안내하려고
④ 해양 생태계의 중요성을 강조하려고
⑤ 봉사활동 소감 발표회를 홍보하려고

7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① 우편물 찾아오기	② 결혼 선물 함께 고르기 
③ 결혼 사진 촬영하기	④ 골동품 전시회 함께 가기
⑤ 골동품 전문가 소개하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① lawyer and client
② doctor and patient
③ coach and athlete
④ manager and salesclerk 
⑤ interviewer and interviewee

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① restaurant	② classroom
③ art museum	④ concert hall
⑤ photo studio

10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① 접수 상황 확인하기	② 준비물 알려주기
③ 예약 사항 변경하기	④ 팩스 사용법 알려주기 
⑤ 일정표 보내주기 

11. 오디션에 대한 다음 안내 방송을 듣고, 메모한 내용 중 잘못된  것을 고르시오.
   
①
②
③
④
⑤

12. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 옷에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 순면 제품이다. 
② 지퍼가 달려 있다.
③ 세탁기 사용이 가능하다.
④ 뒤집어 다려야 한다.
⑤ 평평하게 펴서 말려야 한다. 

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
       
① 	②	③	④	⑤


14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:                                                      

① You should have kept the promise.
② How about buying her a different gift?
③ I’d better send a thank-you note to Judy.
④ Would you show me a cheaper one?
⑤ She’ll be glad if she can afford it.


15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:                                                    

① Jim is a more experienced fighter. 
② The champ’s a born fighter. He’ll win. 
③ Jim’s condition is not very good nowadays.
④ I agree with you. He has some weaknesses.
⑤ The champ’s too old to take Jim’s strong punches. 

16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:                                                      

① Great. I’m happy to leave home.
② Don’t worry. That’s part of growing up.
③ Well, don’t forget to turn it in next time.
④ Okay. I’ll meet you at the school cafeteria.
⑤ Remember, eating breakfast is good for health.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Charlie가 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Charlie:                                                      

① I think I returned it last Monday. 
② Well, I’m sure that’s what I’m called.
③ I’m interested in history and literature.
④ Finally, I’ve grown up to love my brother.
⑤ Okay, that’s the book my teacher talked about.








이제 듣기 ․ 말하기 문제는 다 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
This is one of the most important inventions in human history. Civilization could exist only in warm climates where horses could stay alive through the winter by grazing. Without grass in winter you could not have horses, and without horses you could not have urban civilization. Some time during the so-called Dark Ages, some unknown genius found out how to make this. Forests were turned into meadows. Grass was cut, made into this, and stored. Horses fed on this. Civilization could move north over the Alps. So this gave birth to Vienna and Paris and London and Berlin, and later to Moscow and New York. 
① hay 	② cheese 
③ wheel	④ horseshoe
⑤ greenhouse





19. 밑줄 친 they[their]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? 
Brown bears are found in Alaska and western Canada. They are not only surprisingly fast, but also, for such huge beasts, amazingly agile; ①they can climb up and down nearly vertical inclines. Fishing the streams in summer, they pounce on swift-moving salmon and snatch them with almost simultaneous movements of ②their paws and mouths. Being excellent swimmers, ③they love to play in the water on warm days. In general, ④they show a fear of humans, but Alaskans prefer not to test these creatures and usually carry noisemakers of some kind to warn the bears of ⑤their presence. 
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
For eight years, Asian Ethnic Festival has been proud to share the cultures of over twelve Asian ethnic groups at Freedom Festival Park. In 2007 many of our core members retired, moved from the area, and in several cases, found new jobs that place heavy demands on their time. By the end of last year we realized that without the participation of these key people, holding the event would be difficult if not impossible. At the beginning of 2008 we made the difficult decision not to hold Asian Ethnic Festival this summer. We are hopeful that we can return in 2009. We encourage you to check back with our website in the near future for announcements regarding our festival.
① 행사 취소를 알리려고
② 예산 지원을 요청하려고
③ 자원 봉사자를 모집하려고
④ 축제 프로그램을 안내하려고
⑤ 회의 참석 여부를 확인하려고



21. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
The story of Athena becoming patron goddess of Athens concerns the struggle between the goddess and Poseidon. ①When the city of Athens was first built, both Poseidon and Athena competed for the honor of naming it. ②It was then agreed that whoever offered the most useful object for the people would become the patron of the city. ③Poseidon struck the ground with his trident and produced a horse, whereas Athena presented an olive tree, a symbol of peace and plenty. ④Athens became one of the world’s most important cities that exported olive oil. ⑤As the horse represented struggle and sorrow, the city was named after Athena.
*trident 삼지창(三枝槍)


22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Nowadays the growth of various social network sites, such as E-World and Face-Space, ①is impressive. They are ranked the fourth and fifth most popular site respectively just behind A-Tube. More than sixty percent of their users post their personal photos, as many as two million pictures a day, ②making E-World the top photo website in the country. But ③what many users may not realize is that the company owns every photo. In fact, everything that people post ④being automatically licensed to E-World for its transferable use, distribution, or public display. Recently E-World sold all “user content” ⑤posted on the site to other commercial businesses. Many users unknowingly handed over their photos to corporate control.
23. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Emma was very fond of singing. She had a very good voice, except that some of her high notes tended to sound like a gate which someone had forgotten (A)
oiling / to oil
. Emma was very conscious of this weakness and took every opportunity she could find to practice these high notes. As she lived in a small house, (B)
where / which
 she could not practice without disturbing the rest of the family, she usually practiced her high notes outside. One afternoon, a car passed her while she was singing some of her highest and most difficult notes. She saw an anxious expression suddenly (C)
come / to come
 over the driver’s face. He put his brakes on violently, jumped out, and began to examine all his tires carefully.
　    (A)         (B)         (C)
① oiling  ……  where  ……  come
② oiling  ……  which  ……  to come
③ oiling  ……  where  ……  to come
④ to oil  ……  which  ……  come
⑤ to oil  ……  where  ……  come





24. 다음 그림에 대한 설명 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? 
 
Radio waves travel in ①straight lines. As in Figure 1, some waves go along the ground, but they cannot be used over long distances because of the curve of the earth. Other waves ②shoot upward until they hit a band of the atmosphere called the ionosphere as in Figure 2. From the ionosphere they rebound to the earth. They can ③bounce up and down between the earth and the ionosphere all the way round the earth. But not all radio waves are blocked by the ionosphere. In Figure 3, some very short waves such as those used for television go straight through and ④disappear into space. If we want to send television pictures across the Atlantic, we should get a special satellite to ⑤remove them.
*ionosphere 전리층
25. Rembrandt에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
No discussion of baroque painting is complete without mention of Rembrandt van Rijn (1606-1669), perhaps the greatest Dutch painter of all time. His paintings are usually filled with gold tones and warm browns. By contrasting light and dark, he created subtle moods on canvas. His portraits reveal a psychological insight into man’s inner nature: many of his subjects he portrayed are deep in contemplation. The themes of many of Rembrandt’s paintings were inspired by stories in the Bible. Early in his career, he looked to the Bible only as a source for ideas. In his later religious work, however, he attempted to give a visual interpretation of the Bible. He sought to convey a message rather than simply to please his patrons.
① 바로크 회화의 거장이다.
② 명암의 대비로 섬세한 분위기를 표현했다.
③ 사색에 잠긴 인물을 많이 그렸다.
④ 후기에는 종교와 무관한 그림을 그렸다.
⑤ 주문자의 요구에 얽매이지 않았다.


【26-29】다음 글의 빈 칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
26. Any skier can tell you what good snow is, but when you’re out shoveling your driveway in the winter, you may feel hard-pressed to find any good words for the white nuisance. Actually, in cold climates, snow is far more useful than even most skiers might imagine. When snow covers the ground, it’s an excellent insulator against the colder air above. The snow protects plants and animals that can survive under the snow at temperatures slightly below freezing but would die in the outside air. So if you live in a cold climate, try to remember this winter as you’re out shoveling that you’re working with nature’s own            .
① blanket	② cleaner	③ mirror	
④ thermometer	⑤ weapon

27. Sarah came running in. “Look what I found.” Over the top of the paper I was reading came a crispy long object that caused me to jump. It was a snake skin that had been shed by one of our many garden snakes. “Isn’t it beautiful?” said my wide-eyed seven-year-old. I stared at the skin and thought to myself that it really wasn’t that beautiful, but I have learned never to           . Everything they see for the first time is elementary to their sense of beauty and creativity; they see only merit and excellence in the world until they are educated otherwise. “Beautiful overalls! Now we have a naked snake in our garden,” I answered.
① touch dead animals	 ② tell lies to other people	
③ exaggerate what you see	 ④ ignore what children say
⑤ give children too much money
28. Radio DJs use tricks to keep their listeners tuned in. Here’s one called a cliff-hanger. To make sure listeners won’t switch stations during the radio commercial, the broadcaster throws out a mini-mystery: “And right after the commercial we’ll be back with the winning ticket... It could be yours... Stay tuned!” When you leave a voice mail message, try to include a cliff-hanger: “Hi, Harry, this is Andrew. I have the answer to that question you asked me last week,” or “Hi, Diane, this is Andrew. I have some big news about that project we were discussing.” Now Harry and Diane have a reason to                 .
① call you back	② go out together
③ turn off the radio	④ change the ring tone
⑤ run an advertisement


29. In a traditional theory, the poorer countries could catch up quickly because in those countries,             . For instance, a few roads in a poor country can open a whole new area for trade; in a rich country, a few more roads just relieve a little congestion. A little more education in a poor country can make all the difference; in a rich country, people with degrees often can’t find a job. And of course, it should be easier to copy technology than for a rich country to invent it. When you look at some developing countries in the world, the theory of catch-up seems reasonable.
*congestion 혼잡
① public transportation is well organized
② new investments have far bigger rewards
③ they are free from corruption and instability
④ people work hard to break the chain of poverty
⑤ wages are relatively lower than in rich countries


30. 필자의 주장과 가까운 자녀 양육 사례로 가장 적절한 것은?
Nowadays many parents try to remove pain and failure from their children’s lives. “No, you can’t hang upside down on the monkey bars. You’ll fall,” and “Don’t worry. Everyone gets a trophy.” These are the ideas that guide their children’s lives. They try to eliminate risk even at the expense of fun and experience. The result is a group of kids who graduate from high school and are afraid to take the risks required to succeed because there is a high possibility of failure. Childhood is the time to be cut and scraped and to make mistakes. In childhood you learn how to handle obstacles and adversity for your later life.
① 배낭여행을 원하면 보내 준다.
② 사용한 물건을 스스로 치우게 한다.
③ 자전거를 탈 때는 헬멧을 쓰게 한다.
④ 좋아하는 가수의 공연에 함께 가 준다.
⑤ 연령에 맞는 TV 프로그램을 시청하게 한다.
【31-32】다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
31. In the early days of the car industry, Ford points out, there was no after-sales service. Car makers were totally focused on selling rather than building a relationship with customers, and it was considered good business to charge a lot for spare parts because the owner had no choice but to buy them. Ford believed that the sale of a car was merely the beginning of a relationship with a buyer. He built his cars to last, but also made sure that parts were interchangeable among models, cheap, and easy to install. This ideal of service might have seemed crazy to other manufacturers, but the trust it built up among the public was priceless. [1점]
① 기업의 위기관리 방법	② 자동차 정비의 필요성
③ 자동차 소비 형태의 변화	④ 바람직한 노사 관계의 정립
⑤ 애프터서비스 개념의 도입


32. Even though we are now living in the digital age, the basic and most important element of education―the human connection―has not changed. The most wired students still need that one-on-one, teacher-student relationship to learn and to succeed. Teenagers need instruction in English, math, or history, but they also want personal advice and encouragement. In my English and journalism classes, we talk about Shakespeare and persuasive essays, but we also discuss college basketball, the war in Iraq, and career choices. This personal connection is the vital link between teacher and student that no amount of technology can replace.
*wired 인터넷을 애용하는
① the personal ties between teachers and students
② the means to improve the school environment
③ the roles of technology in education
④ the methods of writing good essays
⑤ the disadvantages of e-learning 


33. 삼나무(redwood)에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The giant redwood in California is described as “the tree with the moving foot.” These trees, which are among the largest and oldest of all living things, moved to California from the Arctic. The warmer climate drew them southward and it took some seventy-five million years to complete the move. Carried by birds, winds, and some strong-toothed animals, the seeds of the redwood traveled thousands of miles from what is now the northernmost tip of Alaska to California. Only the hardest of seeds survived―those that visited Europe soon died out. But the seeds that made it to California put down roots, grew into luxuriant forests, and became camera subjects for tourists.
① 캘리포니아에서 여러 지역으로 전파되었다.
② 추운 지역에 주로 분포한다.
③ 동물로 인해 많은 해를 입고 있다.
④ 유럽에서는 살아남는 데 실패했다.
⑤ 관광객의 접근이 제한되어 있다.
 

34. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
More than one and a half million tickets have already been sold for the Olympic Games in Beijing this August. Many have been bought by (A)
generous / genuine
 sports fans. But others have not. Some ticket holders are already selling off their seats on the black market for inflated prices. A ticket for the opening ceremony that originally cost less than $400 is now on sale for more than $4,000. This is not supposed to be happening. Olympic rules say people can (B)
transfer / transform
 a ticket to somebody else, but not for financial gain. Anyone caught faces a huge fine, but this has not (C)
encouraged / discouraged
 selling their seats openly on the Internet.
      (A)	            (B)				      (C)
① generous	……  transfer	  ……  encouraged
② genuine	……  transform	  ……  discouraged
③ genuine	……  transfer	  ……  discouraged
④ genuine	……  transfer	  ……  encouraged
⑤ generous	……  transform	  ……  encouraged


35. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

Suppose you’re all sitting around the living room and someone is telling a joke. Suddenly, just before his big punch line, the phone rings.

(A) Here’s where you come in. Rescue him by just saying, “Now please get back to your story.” Doing subtle favors pays you back forever.

(B) Once the subject is changed, it’s hard for him to say, “Now, as I was saying...” Instead, he’ll spend the rest of the evening feeling miserable he didn’t get to finish.

(C) After the call, the subject turns to the impending marriage or medical operation of the caller. Nobody remembers the great punch line was not finished―except the joke teller.
*punch line (농담 등에서) 결정적인 대목
① (A)-(C)-(B) 		② (B)-(A)-(C) 	
③ (B)-(C)-(A)		④ (C)-(A)-(B)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)
36. 다음 글에 드러난 필자의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
The noise of the train filled the air now. The bridge began to shake as the train charged across it. I was on the narrow walkway on one side of the tracks. It was so narrow that the wind of a passing train would blow me off the bridge. My legs felt like water. My mouth opened by itself. I couldn’t move. Far in front I could see my friends screaming, “Run!” I thought that I would be soon joining them. That thought unlocked my body. I jumped to my feet. My left foot almost slipped, but I recovered and ran on. When I was almost across, finally I jumped and landed onto the solid ground. And when the train passed completely, I felt a warm hand on my neck. It was Chris’s.
① disappointed → satisfied	② happy → worried 
③ frightened → relieved	④ calm → terrified
⑤ annoyed → sympathetic


【37-38】다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
37. Have you ever noticed how comfortable you feel walking into certain rooms? The chairs are arranged in a way that welcomes you as if saying, “Come right on in and sit on me.” Conversely, you enter other rooms where you must go around the tables and dressers before you finally find a free chair. Likewise, some people arrange their ‘body furniture,’ their arms and legs, to say, “Hey, come right on over and talk to me.” Yet other people’s ‘body furniture’ shouts, “Keep out! Approach at your own risk.” Some studies show that party goers are more comfortable approaching people who stand with an open body, arms uncrossed and hanging at their sides, legs slightly separated, and a slight smile on their faces.
① 좋은 친구는 심리적 안정감을 준다.
② 동선을 고려하여 방안의 가구를 배치해야 한다.
③ 접근을 수용하는 자세가 상대를 편안하게 한다.
④ 산만한 가구 배치는 스트레스를 유발한다. 
⑤ 진솔한 대화가 스트레스를 해소시킨다.


38. The only thing missing from the government’s plan to pump water out of the Yazoo Basin is the scary music that accompanies the return of the monster in the movie. Wetlands reduce flood peaks. Draining them to prevent floods is like eating ice cream to lose weight. Moreover, the plan would be an endless burden on taxpayers: nearly two hundred million dollars to build drain pumps and millions more every year thereafter for their operation and maintenance. The flooding problem can be addressed with minor flood control measures to protect houses and roads and reforestation of wetter areas, not with the giant pumps that drain our precious wetlands.
*basin (강의) 유역 분지
① 홍수 방지를 위한 예산을 늘려야 한다.
② 나무를 심어서 자연 재해를 막아야 한다.
③ 습지의 물을 빼는 사업을 하지 말아야 한다.
④ 저지대 주민들을 다른 곳으로 이주시켜야 한다.
⑤ 자연 보호 구역에서는 영화 촬영을 금지해야 한다.

39. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
 
The above graph shows the distribution of income among all U.S. and world families. ①The economic gap between the rich and the poor in the world is far more noticeable than in the United States. ②The richest 20 percent of the U.S. families received about half the national income; the richest 20 percent of global population, however, received four-fifths of world income. ③At the other extreme, the poorest 20 percent of U.S. population earned 4 percent of the national income; the poorest fifth of the world’s people struggled to survive on just 1 percent of the global income. ④The bottom 60 percent of the world’s people received 10 percent of the world’s income. ⑤On the other hand, the bottom 60 percent of U.S. population enjoyed more than half the national income.

40. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Music seems to be everywhere we go. We now expect to hear music in restaurants, doctor’s offices, airports, and so on. Furthermore, CD players, MP3 players, and other types of equipment are not very expensive, so they are affordable to many people.    (A)   , most people have some way of listening to music at home. Now, you probably think that this is a positive thing. But there are some negative effects of music being so easily available. For one thing, many people have become passive listeners to music. By this I mean music is something that is just there; people don’t really listen to it.     (B)   , fewer and fewer people play musical instruments for fun. There just aren’t many amateur musicians. People rely on the professionals to make the music instead.
        (A)                          (B)
① As a result	……	 In addition
② As a result	……	 On the other hand
③ Nevertheless	……	 Therefore
④ Nevertheless	……	 On the other hand 
⑤ Nevertheless	……	 In addition
41. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

As they get a little older, the same children start making more mistakes.

Parents are sometimes surprised when their children’s grammar starts getting worse. ( ① ) When young children begin using sentences, their grammar is reasonably correct. ( ② ) For example, a child who used the word “mice” might start saying “mouses,” even though she had never heard anyone else make that mistake. ( ③ ) If you see this pattern of mistakes in your own child, don’t worry. ( ④ ) Child development specialists say it’s actually a good sign. ( ⑤ ) By making these mistakes, children are showing a deeper understanding of grammar.

42. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
The race started at two o’clock, and by then there were quite a lot of people in the grandstands. The crowd around us cheered and waved flags as the cars went past, and the noise grew louder and louder. With the lack of commentary or a screen to watch, we had no way of knowing who was in the lead or what was happening in the race. Quite obviously the race is much easier to follow on television than on site, but that didn’t matter. The spectacle of crowds, noise, really extreme cars rushing by (and at least one car going off the track) more than made up for that.
① warm and relaxing	② tense and scary
③ sad and gloomy	④ dynamic and exciting 
⑤ romantic and nostalgic

【43-44】 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
43. The good news is that scientists have uncovered an animal  group that should thrive as global temperatures rise. The  bad news is that it is insects. According to a new research conducted by biologists at the University of Washington,  insects that have adapted to warmer climates also show higher rates of population growth. As global temperatures increase, increases in insect populations could have profound effects on public health, agriculture and conservation, and could even alter entire ecosystems. “Enhanced population growth rates for butterflies might be a good thing, but enhanced growth rates for mosquito populations are much more dubious,” said Melanie Frazier, lead author of the new research.
*dubious 수상한, 의심스러운
① Insects: New Resources
② More Insects, Worse Harvest
③ Warmer World: Insect Heaven
④ Climate Change at Full Speed
⑤ Global Warming: New Food Producer
44. The city council recently passed a bill that bans charity groups from providing food to homeless people in downtown parks. On April 4, the police arrested Eric Montanez, a 22-year-old volunteer, for handing bread and soups to hungry people. They said that they enacted the law in response to complaints from residents and businesses. They argued the presence of readily available food will bring more homeless people into their community, and that they’ll have to raise taxes to provide affordable housing and public assistance and shelters. But volunteers are criticizing the law, calling the measure inhumane. They say, “Food is a human right, not a commodity. They’re not trying to find a solution to why these people are out there.”
*enact (법을) 제정하다
① Is Feeding the Hungry a Crime?
② Can Volunteering Reduce Violence?
③ Is It Necessary to Control Food Prices?
④ Should Taxes Be Raised for Public Health?
⑤ Should Gatherings in the City Parks Be Banned?






45. 다음 글이 시사하는 바를 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

Late in 1953, a young Londoner was looking forward to the appearance of his first book. He was most dismayed when his publisher told him it would not be issued until January 1954. He would miss the Christmas sales, and he feared his book wouldn’t get attention. Deeply disappointed, he tried to have the date changed. His wise old publisher, however, told him that in a month like January, any book more than ordinarily interesting would be assured of good reviews, and its popularity would be guaranteed. And he was right. When the first novel by the then unknown Kingsley Amis was published in the early days of 1954, “Lucky Jim” was an immediate success. 

󰀻

Don’t be disappointed because you are not  (A) ; sometimes it pays to   (B)  .
      (A)              (B)
① talented	 ……	practice
② talented	 ……	wait
③ noticed	 ……	practice
④ noticed	 ……	wait
⑤ noticed	 ……	forget
【46-48】다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(A)In a ferryboat crowded with farmers and merchants, (a)a swordsman was boasting about his great victories, swinging his long sword. The other passengers were afraid of this young man, so they pretended to be interested in his stories.
(B)By now the young man got angry, and he challenged the older man to a fight then and there. The older man said he would show his skills at the nearest shore. He asked the ferryman to guide the boat to a tiny nearby island. As they approached the island, (b)the impatient challenger shouted, “Come! I will show you how sharp my sword is!”
(C)He leaped onto the shore. Then, the older man handed the ferryman his sword. He took the ferryman’s long oar and pushed it hard from the island. “Come back! Come back!” the young man screamed. “This is what is called victory without fighting. Jump into the water and swim here!” (c)the winner shouted back to him. Now the passengers began to laugh, looking back at (d)the man on the shore.
(D)But one older man sat to the side, with his eyes closed. He looked indifferent to (e)the storyteller. It began to annoy the young man, who finally called out, “You don’t even know how to use a sword, old man, do you?” “I most certainly do,” answered the older man. “My style is to win without swords of fighting.” “Don’t be ridiculous,” said the young man.


46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (C) - (D) 
② (B) - (D) - (C) 
③ (C) - (D) - (B)
④ (D) - (B) - (C) 
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? 
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

48. 위 글이 주는 교훈으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Old habits die hard.
② Pride will have a fall.
③ A watched pot never boils.
④ A burnt child dreads the fire.
⑤ A liar should have good memory.
【49-50】두 사람의 대립된 의견을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 

Person A  Why do people think children need to work the same way as adults do? The years between six and eighteen are the time when a child should be a child. Think about things like Little League baseball and family vacations. These are the things we grew up with. Imagine a full year of school without summer vacation. Children would be in the classroom nearly as many hours, as perhaps even more than, we are working. And then, they would be working an additional hour or so every night on homework. Without breaks, they would be stressed-out. I am worried about the consequences.

Person B  I’m a high school student. I love summer vacation. It’s fun and easygoing. But that’s the problem. Many students joke about ‘forgetting everything’ over the summer. Sadly, this is mostly true. We forget a lot of stuff we’re taught during the year. Moreover, students are overworked during the semester. My average work week is about thirty-four hours, and I spend at least fifteen hours for homework, studying, and major projects. Things would be easier if we studied during the summer. Students’ daily workload would be reduced if their normal work were _________________. 


49. 위 두 글의 핵심 쟁점으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① abolishing summer vacation
② working part-time after school
③ reducing the burden of homework
④ encouraging after-school activities
⑤ sending children to a summer camp




50. Person B의 빈 칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① fairly evaluated
② interesting and fun
③ focused on real life
④ spread over the full year
⑤ shared with other students





※확인 사항
 문제지와 답안지의 해당란을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.



1
제3교시
성명
수험번호





  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

2008학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지

외국어(영어) 영역



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자와 여자가 선택할 클럽 로고를 고르시오. [1점]

①
②
③
④
⑤







2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① worried	② satisfied	③ relaxed
④ amused	⑤ indifferent

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. 
① 등산 장비 점검 요령 
② 등산 시 지켜야 할 사항 
③ 응급처치 훈련 시 유의 사항
④ 구조 요청 시 알아야 할 사항
⑤ 여가 선용을 위한 장소 선택 요령 

4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① 영화표 예매하기
② 극장 좌석 바꾸기
③ 극장 좌석 확인하기
④ 영화표 예매 취소하기
⑤ 영화 상영 시간 확인하기

5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
① 봉사 활동 담당자	……	봉사 활동 참가 학생
② 회사 연수 담당자	……	신입사원
③ 간호사	……	환자
④ 세탁소 주인	……	고객
⑤ 인턴사원 채용 담당자	……	인턴사원 지원자
6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 한 일을 고르시오. 
① 교통수단 알려 주기	② 웹사이트 주소 가르쳐 주기
③ 보고서 제출해 주기	④ 현장학습 장소 추천해 주기
⑤ 박물관 위치 찾아 주기

7. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학생 면담 시간을 알려 주려고
② 진로 상담실 개설을 안내하려고
③ 학기말 보고서 양식을 알려 주려고
④ 영어 글쓰기 지도 강사를 구하려고
⑤ 무료 영어 글쓰기 지도를 안내하려고

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입하기로 한 MP3 플레이어에 저장 가능한 곡의 수를 고르시오.
① 100	② 200	③ 400	④ 800	⑤ 1,600

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오. 
① service center	② library	③ bank
④ grocery store	⑤ coffee shop

10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일을 고르시오. 
① 강아지를 동물병원에 데리고 가기
② 강아지를 공원에서 산책시키기
③ 동물병원에 진료시간 예약하기
④ 우체국에 소포 부치러 가기
⑤ 강아지를 집에 데려다 주기

11. 대화를 듣고, 다음 업무평가서에 잘못 표기된 것을 고르시오. [3점] 

12. World Leader Contest에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. 
① Contest는 10월 2일에 개최될 예정이다.
② 참가 희망자는 지원서와 자기 소개서를 제출해야 한다.
③ 선정 위원회에서 지원 관련 자료를 심사한다.
④ 서류 심사 통과자는 다음 주 월요일에 공지된다.
⑤ 인터뷰를 통과하면 학교 대표로 참가한다. 



13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.

①	②	③	④	⑤



14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man:____________________________________________
①That would be amazing. Why don’t you give him a call?
②It sounds good, but I’m not interested in working outside.
③I think you would enjoy yourself in the national park.
④That is true. These oranges would be more delicious.
⑤Are you kidding? Could they work as tree planters?



15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:_________________________________________
① That’s great! Those are really incredible animals.
② Really? Do you have the entire series on DVD?
③Those documents are more important than you realize.
④The weird thing is that I didn’t watch TV at all last night.
⑤ What a relief! If I fail this test, I will be in big trouble.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man:____________________________________________
① Sweetheart, when it happens, you will know it.
② I think I’m taking too many classes this year.
③ If you keep trying, you will get hired soon.
④ The business meeting was a complete success.
⑤ Hey, don’t worry. Your mom will get well soon.

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, 선생님이 Laura와 친구들에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Laura’s teacher:____________________________________
①I hope that this year’s class will study as hard as possible.
②Being late for class can affect how well students learn.
③It is important to eat three balanced meals every day.
④Participation is important. It will help your grades.
⑤I’m proud of you. You set an excellent example.



  이제 듣기․말하기 문제는 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Earth is a large, round planet. To see all of Earth, we would have to go around it in a spacecraft. Thanks to this, however, we don’t have to do that. Shaped like a soccer ball, this represents Earth as round rather than flat, and shows what it would look like from outer space. This shows distances, directions, and the shapes and sizes of areas on Earth. This also has a number of lines including one that runs around the center and divides it into two halves horizontally. 
① a chart	② a scale	③ a compass
④ a satellite	⑤ a globe

19. 밑줄 친 it이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Many people believe that a snowflake cannot last more than a few minutes indoors because ①it is a frozen water crystal. However, you can catch a snowflake and keep ②it forever. According to the chemist Tryggvi Emlisson, ‘superglue’ can be used to do this job. It is a thin, runny glue with special molecules which hardens anything ③it touches. With that in mind, Emlisson did an experiment with a snowflake in January 1979. He took a snowflake, locked ④it in a drop of the ‘superglue,’ and kept it for decades. Recently he showed that ⑤it was still well-preserved.
*snowflake: 눈송이
20. 서비스업 종사자에게 쓴 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Sometimes promises made in good faith can’t be kept. Even though we strive to be error-free, it’s inevitable that problems will occur. Not everything that affects your customer’s experience with you is within your control. What should you do when the service promise is broken? When you discover a broken promise or have one pointed out to you, the first thing to do is to apologize. Don’t waste time blaming yourself, your company, or your customer. Admit that something has gone wrong, and immediately find out what your customer’s needs are. 
① 효율적인 여가 시간 활용의 중요성을 강조하려고
② 업무상 약속 불이행 시 대처방법을 조언하려고
③ 업무 관련 연수의 필요성을 안내하려고
④ 새로운 인사관리 시스템을 소개하려고
⑤ 동료 간의 협동정신을 고취하려고

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Philosophy is, simply put, a way of thinking. More accurately, however, it is a set of mental tools. And that fact is directly related to the question of (A)what/whywe study philosophy. It’s not just to amaze our friends with our own profound thinking, or confuse them with (B)unexpected/unexpectedlyquestions, although some college students may value that possibility the most in taking philosophy courses. We study philosophy (C)because/because ofthe mental skills it helps us develop.


 (A)

(B)

(C)
①
what
……
unexpected
……
because
② 
why
……
unexpected
……
because of
③ 
why
……
unexpected
……
because 
④
why
……
unexpectedly
……
because
⑤
what
……
unexpectedly
……
because of


22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? 
College life is busy. There are too many demands on your schedule. Activities, friends, and pastimes may cause some difficulties in your ①performing the real job at hand. When you are feeling ②overwhelmed by presentations, paper deadlines, or tests, you will probably spend all your time studying ③to deal with these pressures. However, this lack of time for relaxation makes it more difficult ④get the most out of your studies. Promise ⑤yourself that no matter how much work you have, you will always relax during one full evening. You will work better if you take time off for relaxation.
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Few animals have been so mercilessly exploited for their fur as the beaver. ①In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, beaver furs were worth their weight in gold. ②As a result, by 1896, at least 14 American states had announced that all of their beavers had been killed. ③By the beginning of the twentieth century, it looked as if the beaver was about to disappear from the face of the earth. ④The beaver is a furry animal like a large rat with a big flat tail. ⑤However, thanks to a beaver recovery program, which included trapping and relocating to protected areas, particularly in suburban areas of the United States, beavers have made an impressive comeback throughout the country.


[24~27] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. Whether you are vacationing in Europe, spending the winter in Florida, or just visiting a friend’s house for the weekend, a successful trip depends on good packing. Nothing is more frustrating than arriving at your destination only to realize that you have left behind your toothbrush, pajamas, important medication, or travel documents. Successful packing requires you to remember everything that you normally need in daily life, as well as any special items you will need at your destination. Unfortunately, most of us pack at the last minute, and this kind of stress can interfere with our memories, increasing the chances of our___________something we might need.
① bringing	② improving
③ achieving	④ understanding
⑤ forgetting


25. The distinctive property of cultural behavior, as ethologists use the term, is the way it is passed on from one generation to the next. Instead of being inherited by the process of Mendelian genetics, it is ‘inherited’ by imitation. An animal acquires a behavior pattern by imitating it from another. Thus, for a species to acquire a culture, its members should be able not only to learn and memorize but also to meet other members of its own species sufficiently often. Cultural behavior is, therefore, most likely to be found in species that ________________.
*ethologist: 동물행동학자
① attack dominant classes	② form social groups
③ survive natural disasters	④ experience mental hardships
⑤ emphasize physical strengths
26. How can I learn to be a manager? A familiar answer to this question is to say that managers learn from experience. But can experience alone be the best way to be a manager? Several writers have expressed their doubts on this matter. Oscar Wilde noted that ‘experience is the name everyone gives to their mistakes.’ And the historian Froude wrote that ‘experience teaches slowly and at the cost of mistakes.’ Experience is an essential way of learning to improve but is an __________ instrument. We also need guidance from a good manager who will help us to learn from mistakes and make better use of them in the future.
① ideal	② unnecessary	③ efficient
④ innovative	⑤ imperfect 



27. Even a relatively small increase in _______________ can make people much happier and lengthen their lives. This was evident when doctors in retirement villages in the United States encouraged residents to decide the details of their daily lives themselves. They were no longer simply presented with their meals, but could choose from a menu. While previously the caretakers watered the plants, the elderly took over this responsibility for themselves. These small changes worked miracles. The senior citizens became ill less frequently, and in interviews expressed greater happiness. Most striking of all, the annual death rate was reduced by half. [3점]
① visits to hospitals
② satisfaction in workplaces
③ payment for overtime work
④ independence in daily lives
⑤ opportunities to meet others



28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Although we eat bananas often, few of us know much about them. The banana tree is the largest plant on earth without a woody stem. The trunk contains a large amount of water and is extremely (A)deliberate/delicate. Though it can reach a full height of 20 feet in one year, even moderate winds can (B)blow/glowit down. The fruit stem or bunch is made up of seven to nine hands, each containing 10 to 20 fingers which grow slowly (C)thorough/througha mass of tightly packed leaf covers. Just before they ripen, they are picked, packaged, and finally delivered to our local supermarkets. 


(A)

(B)

(C)
①
delicate
……
blow
……
through
② 
delicate
……
glow
……
through
③ 
delicate
……
blow
……
thorough
④
deliberate
……
glow
……
thorough
⑤
deliberate
……
blow
……
thorough


29. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]

A bicycle is a two-wheeled steerable machine that is pedaled by the rider’s feet. The wheels are ①installed in-line in a metal frame, with the front wheel held in a rotatable fork. The frame, which is diamond-shaped, is formed by two ②triangles of tubes. The main triangle consists of the top tube, the seat tube, and the down tube, while the ③front triangle consists of the seat tube, chain stays, and seat stays. The saddle fits on ④top of the seat tube. The rider sits on a saddle and steers by turning handlebars that are attached to the fork. The feet turn pedals ⑤linked to cranks. 
*steer: 조종하다

30. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
At certain times in history, cultures have taken it for granted that a person was not fully human unless he or she learned to master thoughts and feelings. In ancient Sparta, in Republican Rome, and among the British upper classes of the Victorian era,  (A) , people were held responsible for keeping control of their emotions. Anyone who lost his or her temper too easily was deprived of the right to be accepted as a member of the community. In other historical periods such as the one in which we are now living,  (B) , the ability to control oneself is not always highly respected. People who attempt it are often thought to be odd. 


     (A)

(B)
①
for example
……
therefore
② 
for example
……
however
③ 
for example
……
moreover
④
on the contrary
……
however
⑤
on the contrary
……
therefore

31. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경을 가장 잘 나타낸 것은?
I heard a sound, and my heart beat quickly. I was excited, and when at last I saw him coming slowly down the stairs, I caught my breath. He was a tall old man with abundant white hair, but his bushy eyebrows were dark still; they made his great eyes flash with a more grave fire. It was wonderful that at his age those black eyes should still preserve their brilliance. There were in his air assurance and gentleness. He was as I should have wished him to be, and as I watched him, I understood how he had moved men’s minds and touched their hearts. He was every inch a poet.
① impressed 	② fearful	③ disappointed
④ relieved	⑤ sorrowful


32. 다음 글의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
In the United States, some people maintain that TV media will create a distorted picture of a trial, while leading some judges to pass harsher sentences than they otherwise might. However, there are some benefits connected to the televising of trials. It will serve to educate the public about the court process. It will also provide full and accurate coverage of exactly what happens in any given case. Therefore, it is necessary to televise trials to increase the chance of a fair trial. And, if trials are televised, a huge audience will be made aware of the case, and crucial witnesses who would otherwise have been ignorant of the case may play their potential role in it.
① 범죄 예방을 위해 재판 과정을 공개해야 한다.
② 준법정신 함양을 위해 재판 과정을 공개해야 한다.
③ 재판 중계권을 방송국별로 공정하게 배분해야 한다.
④ 재판의 공정성을 높이기 위해 재판 과정을 중계해야 한다.
⑤ 증인의 신변 보호를 위하여 법정 공개는 금지되어야 한다.


[33~34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. In World War II, some musicians offered to play for the entertainment of wounded soldiers. They were surprised to see that their performances achieved more than they had expected at first: a diversion from the boredom and routine of hospital life. Their performances resulted in a lessening of depression, greater socialization among the patients, and increased emotional expression. Since then, music has come to be recognized as a practical and productive way to improve physical, emotional, and mental conditions. 
① beneficial effects of music 
② historical development of music 
③ demand for entertainment in hospitals
④ ways to entertain soldiers at war
⑤ techniques for composing music



34. Man has built his world: he has built factories and houses, he produces cars and clothes, he grows grain and fruit, and so on. But he is not really the master any more of the world he has built; on the contrary, this man-made world has become his master, before whom he bows down, and whom he tries to please as best he can. The work of his own hands has become his master. He seems to be driven by self-interest, but in reality he has become an instrument for the purposes of the very machine his hands have built.
① 새로운 생산물에 대한 인간의 끊임없는 도전
② 물질문명에 대한 인간의 무한한 욕구
③ 인간과 기계문명의 상호보완적 관계 
④ 자신이 만든 생산물에 종속된 인간
⑤ 인간의 탐욕이 사회에 미치는 영향



35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?

The chart above shows the changes in the number of birds and of bird species on an island off the coast of Korea from December 2005 to November 2006. ①The largest number of birds was observed in December, and the largest number of species was observed in May. ②July contained the smallest number of both birds and species. ③The greatest decrease in the number of species was observed from June to July. ④There was a continuous decrease in the number of birds from April to July. ⑤In contrast, a continuous increase in the number of birds was noted from July to November.
[36~37] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. One of the most important aspects of human communication is that past experiences will affect your behavior. Even when you start to discuss some event with your friends, you may soon discover there are differences in your perceptions. What you think boring your friends may find exciting; what you consider pointless they may find meaningful. The messages you receive may be the same for each of you. Yet, each person experiences a variety of feelings and sensations, because each has a unique personality and background. Each of you brings different backgrounds to the event and, as a result, each attributes different meanings to the shared experience. 
① 진정한 의사소통은 솔직한 표현을 통해 이루어진다.
② 친구 간의 견해 차이는 대화를 통해 해결할 수 있다.
③ 상호 개성 존중을 통해 원활한 의사소통이 이루어진다.
④ 과거의 경험에 따라 동일한 상황을 다르게 인식한다.
⑤ 경험을 공유하는 것은 친구가 되는 좋은 방법이다.

37. The family is an easy target for those who regard ‘bad people doing bad things’ as the basic cause of social problems. They assume that when the family fails, the rest of society fails. This view of the world is defective in two fundamental respects. First, it does not consider the fact that families reflect social conditions. Second, it ignores the structural reasons for family breakdown and the profound changes occurring throughout the world. Even in very different societies, families are going through similar changes as a result of global economic changes. This phenomenon shows the fact that families cannot avoid social influences on their everyday lives.
① 시대마다 독특한 사회 문제가 있다.
② 가정의 안정은 사회 안정에 도움이 된다.
③ 가정의 문제에는 사회적 상황이 반영된다.
④ 사회 문제의 대부분은 경제적 문제에 기인한다.
⑤ 가정은 사회를 이루는 가장 기본적인 단위이다.

38. Oak tree에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? 
Oaks are kings of the forest. Most of these trees take 100 years to reach maturity. They can grow up to 150 feet high. The trees have thick trunks and large, wide-spreading branches. The leaf is usually deeply toothed, but in some species it is almost smooth at the edge. Oaks vary in appearance but are easily recognized by their fruit―a round nut set in a woody cup. Native Americans and New England pioneers boiled and ate the nuts of the white oak. Squirrels and some birds store them for winter food. Oaks grow widely throughout the mild temperature zone of the Northern Hemisphere. A few species grow at high altitudes in the tropics.
*Northern Hemisphere: 북반구
① 최대한 100피트까지 자랄 수 있다.
② 잎의 테두리가 모두 매끄럽다. 
③ 둥근 형태의 열매를 맺는다.
④ 열매는 식용으로 사용되지 않았다.
⑤ 열대 지역에 널리 분포한다.



39. Maria Edgeworth에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Maria Edgeworth was born in Oxfordshire in 1767. On her father’s second marriage in 1773, she went with him to Ireland. Her father employed her in keeping accounts and in dealing with tenants. She also acquired a familiarity with fashionable people and with poor Irish farmers, all of which was to be of use in her novels. Her father made her a confidential friend, and he also became her literary adviser. Much of her early writing was for children, and it was not until 1800 that she appeared as a novelist for adult readers with the publication of Castle Rackrent. Its detailed description of Irish characters made the book an instant success. After the publication of the book, she became one of Ireland’s major female writers.
*tenant: 소작인
① 1767년에 Oxfordshire에서 태어났다.
② 아버지는 친구이자 문학적 조언자였다.
③ 초기 작품은 주로 어린이를 위한 것이었다. 
④ Castle Rackrent가 그녀의 첫 작품이었다. 
⑤ 아일랜드의 주요 여류 작가 중 한 사람이 되었다.



40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

While browsing through reading materials, he came across an article in a scientific journal.

A group of scientists was doing research on superconductivity but reached a dead end.(①)They finally gave up, putting the work aside so that they could concentrate on other activities.(②)One of the scientists on this project decided to take a break and went down to the company library.(③)The article approached the subject of superconductivity from a completely different direction from the one they had been working on.(④)He immediately began applying it to their experiments and within 12 months they discovered the secret to superconductivity.(⑤)Not long after, they were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics.
*superconductivity: 초전도성
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. The zoologist and specialist in human behavior, Desmond Morris, says that the reason people start to walk like each other is that they have a subconscious need to show their companions that they agree with them and so fit in with them. This is also a signal to other people that ‘we are together, we are acting as one.’ Other studies suggest that we adopt the mannerisms of our company as well, especially our superiors, such as crossing our legs in the same direction as others. An example often given is when, in a meeting, the boss scratches his nose and others at the table then follow him without realizing it.
① Why People Mimic Others
② Take a Walk for Your Health 
③ Good Manners with Superiors
④ Benefits of Good Companionship
⑤ Differences Between Man and Animals

42. It is evident that humans tend to exploit natural resources to benefit themselves. It is equally evident that the use of natural resources without restoring them will eventually lead to their destruction. There are two extreme positions on the issue. Some people maintain that human dominance in nature is a natural process, and as the dominant species humans have the right to exploit all other species. Other people recognize humans as the only one among the living organisms that can change its behavior to preserve other species. They believe that humans have the moral obligation to protect all other forms of life. 
① Our New Environment: Looking for Alternative Resources
② Nature’s Greatest Creation: The History of Humanity
③ Organisms and Humanity: The Future of Exploration
④ Searches for Life Forms in Extreme Locations
⑤ Humanity’s Rights and Obligations to Nature

43. 다음 글의 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
There were some places of worship in the city, and the deep notes of their bells echoed over the town from morning until night. The sun was shining brightly and cheerily, and the air was warm. The streams were flowing with bubbling water, and the tender songs of birds came floating in from the fields beyond the city. The trees were already awake and embraced by the blue sky. Everything around the neighborhood, the trees, the sky, and the sun, looked so young and intimate that they were reluctant to break the spell which might last forever.
① sad and gloomy	② calm and peaceful
③ busy and comic	④ scary and frightening
⑤ weird and threatening
44. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

You might think iced desserts would be a fairly recent creation due to the problems of refrigeration in the past.

(A)What we call ice cream today was created in the early seventeenth century by a French chef for King CharlesⅠof England. After that, it was introduced and popularized in the United States by First Lady Dolly Madison.
(B)He brought the recipe back to Italy, where it has been a favorite ever since. The Arabs and Indians picked up the idea from the Chinese as well, and named this delicious dessert sherbet. But it did not have the exact form and name of ice cream yet.
(C)The Chinese, however, who had perfected ice storage using the principle of evaporation in the eighth century B.C., were enjoying fruit-flavored ices by the time Marco Polo visited in the thirteenth century.
*sherbet: 과즙으로 만든 빙과
① (A)-(B)-(C)	② (B)-(A)-(C)	③ (B)-(C)-(A)
④ (C)-(A)-(B)	⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)


45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

While we’re walking or traveling, we normally spend less than a second looking at everyday objects that we encounter. The days pass by us without our really being aware of them. Scientists have discovered that the average time we spend looking at things has been steadily decreasing during the last 50 years. In their study, they also discovered that this decrease leads to a lack of interest and enjoyment in life. Just try looking at objects for at least five seconds. Good opportunities for this exercise come when you’re walking or looking out of a car or train window. You’ll find that five seconds is long enough to help you appreciate things from a new point of view.

󰀻

Spending more time (A) things around us will allow us to enjoy them from a(n) (B) perspective.



   (A)

(B)
①
observing
……
fresh
② 
making
……
sentimental
③ 
watching
……
resentful
④
collecting
……
objective
⑤
inventing
……
passionate

[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
The seagull, a hawk, and an eagle all laughed heartily. A crow listened gravely. “For fifteen years, I’ve flown this country,” said the eagle, “and I assure you there is no such thing as air crystallizing. Water, yes; air, no.” “You were probably struck by a hailstone,” the hawk told the sparrow. “Or he may have had a stroke,” said the seagull. “What do you think, crow?” “Why, I think maybe the air crystallized on him,” said the crow.
*hailstone: 우박
(B)
A short time ago some builders, working on a studio in Connecticut, left a huge square of plate glass standing upright in a field. A sparrow flying swiftly across the field struck the glass and was knocked out. He woke and went to his club, where an attendant bandaged his head. “What happened?” asked a seagull. “I was flying across a meadow when all of a sudden the air crystallized on me,” said the sparrow.
(C)
The large birds laughed so loudly that the sparrow became annoyed. And then the sparrow bet each of them ten worms that they couldn’t follow the course he had flown without encountering the hardened atmosphere. They all took his bet; the crow went along to watch. Later, the seagull, the eagle, and the hawk decided to fly together over the route the sparrow indicated. “You come, too,” they said to the crow. “I..., I..., well, no,” said the crow. “I don’t think I will.” So, the three large birds took off together. And they hit the glass together and were all knocked out.

46. 위 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (A)-(B)-(C)	② (A)-(C)-(B)	
③ (B)-(A)-(C)	④ (B)-(C)-(A)	
⑤ (C)-(A)-(B)




47. 위 글이 주는 교훈으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 목표 달성을 위해 부지런해야 한다.
② 적극적인 사람이 난관을 극복한다.
③ 우유부단한 사람은 기회를 놓친다.
④ 남의 경험담에 귀 기울여야 한다.
⑤ 용감한 사람이 성공할 수 있다.
48. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 큰 새들은 sparrow를 비웃었다.
② crow는 sparrow의 말을 경청했다.
③ sparrow는 들판을 날다가 유리에 부딪쳤다.
④ sparrow는 싸움을 하다가 다쳤다.
⑤ crow는 내기에 참여하지 않았다.

[49~50] 두 사람의 대립된 의견을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
[Person A]Can you imagine what the world today would be like if Leonardo da Vinci had become a farmer or Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart a banker? What would the world be like without art? To protect and promote culture, governments have a responsibility as representatives of society to (A) the arts. Cultural property is not always in fashion, but remains important. Who, if not the government, would house these treasures for future generations? Without governmental aid to the arts, there would be a great deal of culture lost because of a lack of funding to either promote their creation or protect them for future generations.

[Person B]The importance of art is determined by the people who value it, not by governments acting as its protectors. Culture should not be shaped by governments, but grow naturally from a society of people. When artists show that they are truly gifted, their genius will be recognized and rewarded. If not, it simply has no value in society. It would be absurd to suggest that the government (B) great plumbers, dentists, or bankers. So, it is also absurd to suggest that governments decide what art is and attempt to preserve items they regard as representative of our lives.

49. 위 두 글의 핵심 쟁점으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① art in education
② defining public art
③ diversity of culture
④ combining world cultures
⑤ governmental funding of art

50. 위 두 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 공통으로 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① employ	② support	③ include
④ ignore 	⑤ oppress 

* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.



1
제3교시
성명
수험번호





  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

2008학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지

외국어(영어) 영역



1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 만들 학급 신문의 디자인을 고르시오. [1점]
① 	② 	③ 
④ 	⑤ 

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① relaxed	② amused	③ annoyed
④ curious	⑤ jealous

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오.
① 태껸	② 씨름	③ 검도
④ 권투	⑤ 유도

4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① 주말 영화표 예매하기
② 야외 콘서트 함께 가기 
③ 콘서트 포스터 구해 주기
④ 콘서트 순회 일정 안내해 주기
⑤ 휠체어용 관람 공간 마련해 주기

5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 기숙사 사감 	……학생
② 시계 수리공 	……고객
③ 교통경찰	……시민
④ 도서관장 	……사서
⑤ 아파트 경비원 	……주민
6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 한 일을 고르시오.
① 숙박 장소 추천	② 버스 예약 확인
③ 향토 음식점 소개	④ 신분증 재발급 안내
⑤ 면회 준비 사항 조언

7. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 변경된 봉사활동 계획을 알리려고
② 민박을 제공할 학생을 모집하려고
③ 자매학교 방문 학생을 선발하려고
④ 박물관 견학 일정을 안내하려고
⑤ 학교 홈페이지를 홍보하려고

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불해야 할 금액을 고르시오.
① $80	② $150	③ $180
④ $240	⑤ $300

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
① emergency room	② convenience store
③ daycare center	④ amusement park
⑤ fire station	

10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 보낼 문자 메시지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① Welcome back! Happy Family Reunion!
② You’re the best parents in the world!
③ Congratulations on your promotion!
④ Thank you for the lovely flowers!
⑤ Get well soon, Sweetheart!

11. 다음 광고지를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]

①
②
③
④
⑤

12. 학생 영상물 경연 대회에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하는 것을 고르시오. 
① 가족 행사에 관한 내용이어야 한다.
② 영상물의 길이에는 제한이 없다.
③ 휴대폰 카메라를 사용할 수 있다.
④ 교사 위원회가 작품을 심사한다.
⑤ 10월 초까지 작품을 제출해야 한다. 




13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.

① 	② 	③ 	④ 	⑤ 




14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: ____________________________________________
① Thanks. I’ll call my neighbor right now.
② Really? You should buy another cell phone.
③ I’d love to, but I recharged my phone last night.
④Right. I’ll write down and carry important numbers.
⑤No way. It’s bothersome to carry an extra battery.




15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman: __________________________________________
① I agree with you. I should work at home.
② OK. I’ll go with you, but keep your word. 
③ I didn’t expect you to come home this early.
④ Terrific! Enjoy the trip while I give my presentation.
⑤ How nice! I’ll be at home with my friends all weekend.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: ____________________________________________
① Sure I can. The market isn’t far from here.
② Thanks. I want to go with Dad to the bus station. 
③ Don’t worry. I’ll try to finish before she gets here.
④ I’m sorry. I didn’t buy any fruit on my way home.
⑤ That’s a great idea. Let’s go out for some fresh air.

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, 선생님이 민수에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Minsu’s teacher: Minsu, ____________________________
① I hope you’ll help the teachers at school.
② I’ll be happy to help you with any problems.
③ I think success comes from knowing yourself. 
④ I’m sure your parents are telling me the truth.
⑤ I really appreciate your help with my project.


  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This refers to a kind of building for sheltering animals, their feed, farm supplies, farm machinery, and farm products. Sometimes this is used for storing hay and grain, too. The need for this has declined with the introduction of tractors and electrical services. Traditionally, wood was used in constructing this, but sheet steel and aluminum have been increasingly used since World War II, particularly on large farms in North American and European countries. This usually consists of two stories, the first to shelter animals or machines and the second to store hay or grain.
① barn	② cottage	③ garage
④ windmill	⑤ factory

19. 밑줄 친 they[their]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? 
Whether woven or printed, a fine tie is a work of art from beginning to end. Woven silk ties are the most luxurious of all. Though less common today, ①they were at one time the essential accessory of a true gentleman. Because of ②their high manufacturing cost, woven silk ties are very expensive. This in part accounts for the fact that ③they now represent only five percent of tie production. But ④they will never fall entirely by the wayside and will make periodic comebacks. Printed silk ties are much cheaper and simpler than ⑤their woven counterparts. However, silk printing demands a high level of technical mastery. 	*woven: (실로) 짠
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Although most people use the bus or subway to get around Seoul, every once in a while it’s nice to spend a sunny day crossing the city on a bicycle. While riding, you are certain to discover new streets and different views of the capital. “The key to enjoying cycling is to choose the right streets,” says one city official, adding that alleys off main roads can be interesting areas to explore. If you only ride occasionally, you don’t have to spend a lot of money because bikes can be rented. Let’s discover Seoul and learn about its undiscovered back streets on a bike. 
① 교통난 해소를 위해 대중교통 이용을 권장하려고   
② 에너지 절약을 위해 자전거 타기를 홍보하려고 
③ 자전거를 이용한 도시 구경을 장려하려고
④ 자전거 전용 도로 설치를 건의하려고
⑤ 자전거 보관 장소를 안내하려고

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I had twenty village girls to teach, some of them with such a strong country accent (A) that/what I could hardly communicate with them. Only three could read, and none could write, so at the end of my first day I felt quite (B)depressing/depressed at the thought of the hard work ahead of me. But I reminded myself that I was fortunate to have any sort of job, and that I would certainly get used to (C)teaching/being taught these girls, who, although they were very poor, might be as good and as intelligent as children from the greatest families in England.
    (A)             (B)                (C)
① that	……	depressed	……	teaching
② that	……	depressing	……	being taught
③ that	……	depressed	……	being taught
④ what	……	depressing	……	being taught
⑤ what	……	depressed	……	teaching 

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? 
The bodies of flowing ice we call glaciers ①are the most spectacular of natural features. They result from densely packed snow. Unlike a stream, a glacier cannot be seen ②move. Accurate measurements, however,  show that it is flowing. Erosion of bedrock by glaciers and deposits of the eroded materials are characteristic and ③easily recognizable. Their distribution enables us to infer that in the recent past glaciers have been far more extensive ④than they are today. At the same time, this evidence has ⑤raised the problem of the cause of the ‘ice ages.’ 	*erode: 침식하다
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
When drawing human figures, children often make the head too large for the rest of the body. A recent study offers some insight into this common imbalance in children’s drawings. ①As part of the study, researchers asked children between four and seven years old to make several drawings of adults. ②When they drew frontal views of the adults, the size of the heads was markedly enlarged. ③Adults tended to draw children’s faces larger than their own. ④However, when the children drew rear views of the adults, the size of the heads was not nearly so exaggerated. ⑤The researchers suggest that children draw bigger heads when they know that they must leave space for facial details. 

[24~27] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. Often the best form of communication with friends is, surprisingly, ____________. Friendship is not only about what we say, but even more importantly about what we do not. True friendship occurs when ‘information’ is conveyed by absences of words. The point is to convey as much as possible indirectly, ‘between the lines.’ The reason such ‘negative’ communication is important is that it requires a greater closeness than positive communication. The greater the distance between sender and receiver, the more the need for directness. Only when two or more people share an enormous amount can the much more economical negative communication take place.
① silence	② sincerity	③ negotiation
④ honesty	⑤ courage


25. Team performance is not possible if the leader grabs all the best chances, assignments and credit for himself or herself. Indeed, the crucial point of the leader’s challenge is to _________________________________. When the Dollus Bank team leader Trevor Canfield made room for a junior investment banker to lead a prestigious account, he did just that. So did Mike Fangos at Gopak, when he encouraged a chemical engineer who “could not balance his checkbook at home” to take responsibility for preparing the Zebra Team’s $200 million budget. Stepping out of the way to give opportunities to others, however, does not mean giving up responsibility for guidance, monitoring, and control. [3점]
① drive all of the team members into competition
②give direct instructions and orders to the executives
③ recruit competent and qualified people for the team  
④ take charge of all assignments by himself or herself
⑤provide performance opportunities to the team members
26. Michel de Montaigne, the sixteenth-century French essayist, loved conversation. “To my taste,” he says, “the most fruitful and natural exercise of our mind is conversation. I find the practice of it the most delightful activity in our lives.” According to Montaigne, “studying books is a weak mental activity, while conversation provides teaching and excercise all at once.” Montaigne thinks of conversation as ______________________ that will improve his mind. “If I am fighting with a strong and solid opponent, he will attack me; his ideas send mine soaring. Rivalry, competitiveness and glory will drive me and raise me above my own level. Our mind is strengthened by contact with dynamic and well-ordered minds.”
① a regular meditation	② an accidental discovery
③ an efficient field study	④ a psychological disorder
⑤ an intellectual sporting event

27. Studies regarding our habits of eating out found that, when we eat out, we tend to underestimate the number of calories we consume by up to half. When we eat in a relaxing, candle-lit restaurant, we tend to enjoy our food longer even if we are full. Dining with friends also contributes to consuming more calories. Researchers found that women who dined with two or three friends ate 700 calories on average, double that of solo diners. Our psychology is another factor in the consumption of calories. A waiter who greeted customers with the question, “What are we celebrating tonight?” _______________________ than waiters who didn’t. Therefore, if you treat dining as a special occasion, you’re more likely to eat more. 
① got more orders	②dined out more frequently
③ was in a worse mood	④delivered food more slowly
⑤ consumed more calories

28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The day of the whale is rapidly approaching its end. Some species of whales are already (A)infinite/extinct. Others are being reduced in number faster than they can reproduce. When whales are gone, the whole chain of life in the sea, as we know it, will be (B)upset/stable. And eventually this will have a direct effect on the life of man, too. Although there are international agreements signed by some governments, people are killing whales without considering what future (C)conveniences/consequences this will have. Let’s save whales, friends of the earth.
    (A)	      (B)	       (C)
① infinite	……	stable	……	conveniences
② infinite	……	stable	……	consequences
③ extinct	……	stable	……	conveniences
④ extinct	……	upset	……	consequences
⑤ extinct	……	upset	……	conveniences

29. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]

When a ballet dancer leaps across the stage in a grand jump, her center of mass faithfully follows a parabolic path during the jump. The distance between the top of her head and her center of mass ①changes depending upon the movements of her legs. When she ②stretches her legs out horizontally after her feet leave the stage, her center of mass moves upward. It results in an ③increase in the distance between the top of her head and her center of mass. In contrast, when the dancer ④lowers her legs toward the ground, the opposite occurs. The height of the top of her head remains ⑤constant throughout the jump. The result gives the impression that the dancer isdrifting through the air.

30. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Soaring eagles have the incredible ability to see a mouse in the grass from a mile away.    (A)   , cats have the extraordinary ability to see in the dark. Through natural selection over time, these animals have developed  visual systems uniquely adapted to their way of life. The human visual system has also adapted to many things well.    (B)    our night vision is not as good as that of a cat, our color vision is excellent. This is not a bad tradeoff, since being able to enjoy a sunset’s beauty seems worth an occasional fall in the dark.
     (A)                 (B)
① Similarly	……	Although
② Similarly	……	Once
③ Similarly	……	Before
④ Instead		……	Before
⑤ Instead		……	Once
31. 다음 글에 드러난 Henry의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Henry was moving the soccer ball down the field thrilled with the prospect of scoring a goal−the first in his entire life. In his haste, he didn’t realize that his teammates weren’t anywhere near him. Concentrating, filled with expectation, he sped eagerly toward the goal. It wasn’t until the last second that he noticed who the goalkeeper was−his teammate! It was too late, however, as Henry’s foot had already begun moving to kick the ball into the net. A perfect kick! Then total silence! Henry realized that he had made a terrible mistake. He had scored for the opposing team. Henry glanced at his coach who looked furious as he screamed at him. He wanted the earth to swallow him up.
① sorrowful	 → joyful	② angry	→ calm
③ concerned	 → relieved	④ lonely	→ envious
⑤ excited 	 → embarrassed

32. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Children grow up and leave home. They go from helpless babies to mature adults while our back is turned. The secret is to try and keep pace with them. We have to resist the urge to do everything for them, and let them fry eggs or paint trash cans for themselves. By the time they reach adolescence, we may expect them to be able to keep their room tidy for the first time. But they have never done it before. They have to learn how to do it, and part of that learning process is not doing it, doing it badly, and doing it differently from how we would do it. Growing is a messy business. Our job is to help them, that is, to hand them responsibility slowly, bit by bit.
① Assist kids in doing their homework.
② Give kids the chance to learn responsibility. 
③ Set strict rules for the benefit of your kids.
④ Teach kids to help their neighbors in need.
⑤ Allow kids to experience messy things first.

[33~34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. Many years ago, my drama director, frustrated with my bad acting in a play, shouted, “No! No! Your body is contradicting your words. Every tiny movement reveals your private thoughts.” Then he said something I’ll never forget: “The way you move is your autobiography in motion.” How right he was! On the stage of real life, every physical move you make subconsciously tells everyone the story of your life. As dogs hear sounds our ears can’t detect, people make and notice moves that are beneath human consciousness but have tremendous power to attract or offend.
① body movement as a reflection of our mind
② sign language as an indicator of nervousness
③ cultural differences in writing autobiographies
④ the hidden power of human consciousness in drama
⑤the contrast between animal and human hearing systems

34. Science is all about trying ideas, abandoning those that don’t work, and building on those that do. It never stops. Those people in the past who had wrong ideas weren’t fools. They were doing the best they could, given the knowledge of their times. We do the same thing today. And you can be sure that people in the future will look back and wonder why we believe some of the things we do. Does that make science unimportant? If some of our scientific theories are going to be proved false, why bother studying them? If you believe something is an absolute truth, you can just memorize it and get on with your life. After all, there is always something to explore in the world. 
① 과학의 절대적 진리와 중요성
② 과학자에게 요구되는 윤리 의식
③ 지속적인 과학 탐구의 당위성
④ 과학이 산업 발전에 미치는 영향
⑤ 과학자에게 필요한 인문학적 소양

35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?

The graph above shows the results of a survey conducted in 2005 regarding young Australians’ sources of advice by age group. ①Friends, parents, and relatives were the three most common sources of advice for all age groups, although their relative importance varied with age. ②As age increased, friends progressively became a more important source of advice, while parents and relatives became less important. ③Those aged from 11 to 14 turned more often to parents than friends for advice. ④For young Australians aged from 15 to 19, friends was the biggest source of advice, followed by parents. ⑤For those aged from 20 to 24, their dependence upon mass media was the lowest among the three age groups, while their dependence upon teachers was the highest.
36. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

The result is that the population enters a period of rapid growth.

There is an interesting relationship between a country’s developmental progress and its population structure. (　①　) According to the theory of demographic transition, nations go through several developmental stages. (　②　) The earliest stage is characterized by high birth and death rates and slow growth. (　③　)　As they begin to develop, the birth rate remains high, but the death rate falls. (　④　)  Then, as industrialization peaks, the birth rate falls and begins to approximate the death rate. (　⑤　) Eventually, population growth slows drastically, reaching a stage of very modest growth which is seen in many European nations today. 	*demographic: 인구(통계)의

[37~38] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
37. “What is value to the customer?” is the most important question in business, yet is rarely asked. One reason is that managers are quite sure that they know the answer. Value is what they, in their business, define as quality. But this is almost always the wrong definition. The customer never buys a product but the satisfaction of a want. For the teenage girl, for instance, value in a shoe is high fashion. Price is a secondary consideration and durability is not value at all. For the same girl as a young mother, a few years later, what she looks for is durability, price and comfort.	*durability: 내구성
① 소비자는 품질을 고려하여 상품을 구매해야 한다.
② 경영자는 품질보다 가격을 우선시해서는 안 된다.
③ 경영자는 소비자의 상품 구매 기준을 이해해야 한다.
④ 소비자는 상품을 구매할 때 유행을 따라서는 안 된다.
⑤ 경영자는 공공 이익을 우선하여 상품을 개발해야 한다.

38. By thinking the right thoughts, you can make any job less distasteful. Your boss wants you to be more interested in your job so that he or she will make more money. But let’s forget about what the boss wants. Think only of what getting interested in your job will do for you. Remind yourself that it may double the amount of happiness you get out of life, for you spend about one half of your waking hours at work. Keep reminding yourself that getting interested in your job will take your mind off your worries, and in the long run, will probably bring about promotion and increased pay. Even if it doesn’t do that, it will reduce fatigue to a minimum and help you enjoy your hours of leisure.
① 직장 상사의 의견을 존중해야 한다.
② 집안일을 직장으로 가져가지 말아야 한다.
③ 업무 시간을 줄이고 여가 시간을 늘려야 한다. 
④ 직장의 일을 즐기면 더 행복한 삶을 살 수 있다.
⑤ 직장에서는 마음을 터놓을 수 있는 동료가 필요하다. 




39. artificial skin에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
A group of researchers have recently developed an artificial skin that can detect both pressure and temperature at the same time. They inserted pressure sensors and temperature sensors in a thin plastic film to create a net-like structure. The new artificial skin is flexible enough to wrap around robot fingers and relatively inexpensive to make. This breakthrough has the potential to improve how robots will function in the real world. Future artificial skins could incorporate sensors not only for pressure and temperature, but also for light, humidity, strain or sound.
① 압력과 온도를 동시에 감지할 수 있다.
② 얇은 플라스틱 필름 속에 감지 장치가 삽입되어 있다.
③ 로봇 손가락에 감을 수 있을 정도로 유연하다.
④ 실생활에서 로봇의 기능을 향상시킬 잠재력을 갖고 있다.
⑤ 빛과 소리의 감지 기능을 통합하지는 못할 것이다.




40. red fox에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The red fox often acts in ways that seem extremely crafty. Trappers seeking red foxes must clean their equipment well to rid it of human smells, or the foxes will not come near. The foxes also manage to dig up hidden traps and set them off without being caught. Red foxes have even been known to use a pedestrian underpass rather than cross a highway. On the other hand, red foxes are sometimes extremely careless. They often come running in response to an imitation of their bark, regardless of danger. They readily return to areas where they have been heavily hunted in the past. So whether or not the red fox is especially intelligent is an open question.
① 사람 냄새를 맡고 가까이 온다.
② 숨겨진 덫을 파헤치기도 한다.
③ 고속도로 위로 다닐 만큼 대담하다.
④ 과거에 쫓겼던 지역에는 돌아오지 않는다.
⑤ 지능이 높은 것으로 입증되었다.
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. Sleep recharges our brains and helps us think more clearly. But more importantly it is a time when noise from the world outside is shut off and creative energy from the deepest inner mind can break through. It’s no wonder why you often wake up with great ideas after a sound sleep. Or why Elias Howe thought of the idea of a sewing machine after waking up. Or why Dmitri Mendeleev literally dreamed up the periodic table of elements. If you aren’t making time for sleep, you are limiting your creativity and your life’s potential. 
① Coping with Sleeping Problems
② Creativity through Good Sleep
③ Creativity and Its Potential
④ Advice for a Sound Sleep
⑤ Leading a Peaceful Life

42. All cells need energy to live, whether they are muscle cells in a hiker’s leg, or young yeast cells turning a tank of grape juice into wine. Regardless of type, however, no cell can ‘make’ energy. Energy can neither be created nor destroyed, but can merely be transformed from one state to another. Each cell must therefore obtain its energy from some outside environmental source, and cells do so in a range of ways. Yeast cells growing on a grape skin obtain energy from nutrient molecules originally processed within the grape leaves and stored within the fruit. Humans obtain energy from molecules present in the plant and animal matter they eat and digest. 	*yeast: 효모
① Conditions for Good Nutrition 
② Process of Making Muscles
③ Analysis of Muscle Cells
④ Energy Sources of Cells 
⑤ Reproduction of Cells

43. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
Twenty-four-year-old Bob was swimming along the beach about one hundred yards offshore. When he was  forty feet away from a group of bathers who were swimming in about five feet of water, he suddenly let out a scream. All the bathers could hear was a lot of noise resulting from Bob’s attempts to get out of the water. One of the group, Tim, realizing that something was wrong, rushed to Bob’s aid. Tim grabbed the struggling Bob and attempted to pull him toward shore, but in vain. Some lifeguards immediately launched their surf boat and set out toward the troubled swimmer.
① urgent	② peaceful	③ romantic
④ monotonous	⑤ festive
44. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

  When a basketball team finds itself on the wrong side of momentum, or when its opponent has gained the advantage, the coach calls for a timeout.

(A)Likewise, we must occasionally call timeout. In the cycles of life and business we have times when we must break the rhythm of failure and loss. During this break in the action we must determine what is working and what is not.
(B)The pause along with the adjusted game plan can also increase the team’s confidence and break its downward cycle. It can change the rhythm of the game. 
(C)The timeout can break the momentum and allows the coach to adjust the game plan. He may have noticed a weakness on the other side that his team can utilize.	*momentum: 여세, 힘
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C) 	
③ (B)-(C)-(A)	④ (C)-(A)-(B)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)



45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

  I believe mystery plays a fundamental role in experiencing the great things in life. If you can determine the chemicals that exist in a food or wine, does that help you understand why you like the taste? Do you think that being able to list all the reasons you love a person enables you to love that person more or differently? If something is beautiful to you, can you really explain why in a meaningful way? There are many sensations and feelings that we can experience but not fully define. Once we give up the belief that definition of these emotions is necessary or possible, we can actually experience them more completely because we have removed the analytical filter we use to find definitions.

󰀻

The attempt to  (A)  things in definite ways prevents us from   (B)   them deeply and completely.

     (A)	      (B)
① analyze	……	experimenting
② analyze	……	appreciating
③ mystify	……	discovering
④ mystify	……	investigating
⑤ mystify	……	justifying
[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
My freshman year flew by. Your Spanish class quickly became my favorite class. You taught us through arts and crafts, music, and pictures. All of your classes were incredibly visually stimulating. Your classes were just unusual enough to be completely memorable. Before I knew it, I found myself looking forward to your class, which was the last period of the day. I barely realized that the 180th day had arrived. I had done well throughout the year, and felt that I had learned a reasonable amount of new information, but that certainly didn’t mean that I understood Spanish. You still had to prove me wrong, as you’d promised so many months ago. 
(B)
I walked into your class for the last time, ever skeptical, and listened as you reread the passage from the first class. My jaw dropped in amazement when, as promised, I understood every word! All of those episodes of Muzzy cartoons and silly mnemonic devices had actually come together to form something surprisingly intelligible. I looked around at the rest of the class. The stunned faces that surrounded me proved that everyone else had also understood. The feeling of pride and accomplishment that came over me was incredible, and it is something that I will never forget.
	*mnemonic: 기억을 도와주는
(C)
On the first day of Spanish class, you read us a paragraph in a language that we knew nothing about, and I didn’t understand a word of it. From the panicked faces I saw around the room, none of my classmates did either. You promised us that on the last day of class when you reread it, we would understand. I rolled my eyes, knowing that there was no way I would be able to comprehend something so foreign by June. I gave you 180 days to prove me wrong, but remained content in knowing that you wouldn’t be able to do it. 

46. 위 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)	③ (B)-(C)-(A)
④ (C)-(A)-(B)	⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)

47. 밑줄 친 prove me wrong이 의미하는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① prove that I would hate Spanish class
② prove that I would be a language teacher
③ prove that I would understand the paragraph
④ prove that I would fail the Spanish test
⑤ prove that I would feel guilty
48. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 나는 스페인어 수업을 좋아하게 되었다.
② 스페인어 수업에 다양한 시청각 자료가 활용되었다.
③ 첫 수업 때 하셨던 선생님의 약속은 그대로 이루어졌다.
④ 우리는 처음과 마지막 수업에서 같은 지문을 들었다.
⑤ 학년 초부터 스페인어를 잘하는 친구가 많았다.

[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Mel, a chimpanzee in Gombe, Nigeria, was three years old when his mother died. He had no elder brother or sister to adopt him. To our amazement, he was adopted by a twelve-year-old chimpanzee, Spindle, who was certainly not related to Mel. As weeks passed, the two became    (A)   . Spindle took care of Mel while traveling; he permitted (a)the infant to ride on his back, even allowed him to hang beneath, as a mother carries her baby. Most remarkably, if Mel got too close to the big males, Spindle would hurry to remove (b)his small charge from danger even though this meant he got into trouble himself. 
For a whole year, this relationship endured, and there was no doubt that Spindle saved Mel’s life. Why did Spindle act that way, burdening himself with the care of (c)a sickly youngster? Probably we shall never know, but it is interesting to reflect that during the plague that claimed Mel’s mother, Spindle’s mother also died. Is it possible that Spindle’s loss of his mother left an empty space in his life? And that the contact with (d)a dependent baby helped to fill that space? Or did Spindle experience an emotion similar to that which we call(B)   ? Perhaps (e)the lonely chimpanzee felt a mixture of both.

49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


50. 위 글에서 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
      (A)               (B)
① inseparable	……	revenge
② inseparable	……	sympathy
③ indifferent	……	revenge
④ indifferent	……	sympathy
⑤ indifferent	……	affection

* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.







  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

2009학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지

외국어(영어) 영역


제3교시

1

짝수형

성명

수험번호


1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 사용할 그래프를 고르시오. [1점]
①	②
   	   
③	④
   	   
⑤
   

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① angry	② proud	③ bored
④ sorrowful	⑤ uninterested

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. 
① 헌혈	② 적성 검사	③ 예방 접종
④ 면접	⑤ 체력 검사

4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① to buy a dog	 to visit Tom’s mother
 to call Tom’s father	④ to play the piano
 to ask Tom to study with her

5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $300	② $350	③ $400	④ $450	⑤ $500
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 새 이웃과 알고 지내는 방법을 알려주려고
② 올바른 설탕 보관 방법을 설명하려고
③ 이웃 간 예절의 중요성을 강조하려고
④ 새로운 제빵 기술을 소개하려고
⑤ 이사하기 전에 점검해야 할 사항을 조언하려고


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오. 
① to recommend a Canadian professor
② to send the quiz items by e-mail
③ to give advice on some quiz items
④ to buy books on geography
⑤ to advertise the quiz show


8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 약사—고객	② 의사—배드민턴 선수
③ 체육 교사—학생	④ 악기점 주인—판매원
⑤ 스포츠 용품점 직원—손님


9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
① 면세점	② 세관	③ 여행사
④ 활주로	⑤ 관제탑


10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
 편의점 들르기	 자전거 수리하기
 목격자 만나기	 경찰에 신고하기
 시청 방문하기


11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]

①
②
③
④
⑤

12. Summer History Field Trip에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
①참가자들은 위스콘신 지역의 역사 유적지를 탐방한다.
②8월 3일에 시작하여 5일 동안 진행된다.
③웹사이트에서 등록할 수 있다.
④등록비는 150달러이며 식비는 별도이다.
⑤참가자들은 편안한 옷과 신발을 가져와야 한다.

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
 
①	②	③	④	⑤

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:__________________________________________
①I didn’t know you already returned the books.
②It’s good to hear that you’ve saved a lot.
③Borrow the books instead of buying them.
④You have to be responsible for what you did.
⑤I want to borrow some books from the library.

15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:____________________________________________
① Yeah. You’re really a great help.
② I’m sorry, but I can’t help you out.
③ You should have slept more than that.
④ No, thanks. I’ve had enough coffee.
⑤ Don’t worry! Just go to see a doctor.

16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Woman:___________________________________________
① Sure. That’s why I want to wear these clothes longer.
② You’re right. I’d like to take these clothes to the store.
③ Certainly. I won’t buy second-hand items again. 
④ OK. I’ll go to the store and ask for a refund.
⑤ That’s true. I’m not making the profit I expected. 
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Mark가 Peter에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Mark:____________________________________________
① Hey, cheer up! Your mother is here to watch you.
② Why didn’t you invite your mother to the competition?
③ Your mother has already left the swimming pool.
④ Peter, I didn’t know your mother is a good swimmer.
⑤ Congratulations! Finally, you beat your competitors.




  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This is different from all other markets in that people do not buy things here such as clothes, shoes, or cars. Thanks to this, people can easily exchange one country’s money with that of another. People desire to make such exchanges for many reasons. Some are concerned with the import or export of goods or services between one country and another. Others wish to move capital from one area to another. Still others may want to travel to a foreign country. This is incredibly important to the global economy. This gets influenced by a real world event, and has an impact on the economy of a nation, causing the value of its money to rise and fall.
① 벼룩시장	② 주식시장	③ 외환시장
④ 재래시장	⑤ 경매시장



19. 밑줄 친 He[he]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Flying over rural Kansas in an airplane one fall evening was a delightful experience for passenger Walt Morris. ①He watched the twinkling farmhouse lights below. Suddenly, the peace of the evening was broken when the plane’s landing lights started flashing on and off. ‘What’s happening?’ ②he wondered as he gripped the armrests. As the pilot was about to make an announcement, ③he thought, ‘This is it. He’s going to tell us we’ve got a major problem.’ Instead, ④he told the passengers, “In case you’re worried about the flashing lights outside the plane, I’m sending a signal to my kids.” ⑤He was relieved to hear the continued announcement: “They’re at home over on that hill to the left, and they just sent me a Morse code message saying, ‘Good night, Dad.’”
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
If you are worrying about money when you are away, your enjoyment will suffer. Plan your budget in advance to give yourself time to research the costs fully. If you cannot get confirmed prices, get as many estimates as you can. Note the best price and the worst price and budget in between the two. Ideally, the budgeted figures will work out just about right. If they don’t, you will have to use your emergency fund to cover basic expenses such as food, transport, and accommodation, and there will be less money available for an unexpected situation that necessitates a sudden change of plan. So, be sure to make your budget realistic, so that you can be confident that you will be able to pay for all aspects of the trip.
① 여행 중 상품 구매 시 주의 사항을 알려주려고
② 여행 경비 예산 짜기에 대해 조언하려고
③ 과도한 여행 경비 지출의 위험을 경고하려고
④ 여행 중 위급 상황에 대처하는 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 여행 시 적절한 교통수단에 대해 안내하려고

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many social scientists have believed for some time (A)that/what birth order directly affects both personality and achievement in adult life. In fact, people have been using birth order to account for personality factors such as an aggressive behavior or a passive temperament. One might say, “Oh, I’m the eldest of three sisters, so I can’t help that I’m so overbearing,” or “I’m not very successful in business, because I’m the youngest child and thus less (B)aggressively/aggressive than my older brothers and sisters.” Recent studies, however, have proved this belief to be false. In other words, birth order may define your role within a family, but as you mature into adulthood, (C)accepted/acceptingother social roles, birth order becomes insignificant. 
   (A) 			     (B)		    (C)
① that	……	aggressively	……		accepting
② that	……	aggressive	……		accepting
③ that	……	aggressive	……		accepted
④ what	……	aggressive	……		accepted
⑤ what	……	aggressively	……		accepted

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
You may think that moving a short distance is so easy that you can do it in no time with ①little effort. You may decide to use your own car because you think that you don’t need the services of a moving company. Well, you might be wrong. You are under the false impression that you do not have as many items to pack as you really ②do. You find out ③too late that your car cannot carry as much as you thought it could. So, it takes you far more trips to your new home than you thought it would. There is also the possibility of ④damage your stuff, some of it valuable. All these things ⑤considered, it might be better to ask for the services of a moving company.
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Roman doll-makers continued to use technology developed by the Egyptians and Greeks, but in line with the artistic sensibilities of their culture, they were constantly trying to make dolls more elegant and beautiful. ①One doll, found near Prati in Rome, was made of ivory and lay beside her owner who had died at the age of eighteen. ②The huge growth in the understanding of civilization raised awareness of other important roles of trade. ③Next to the doll was a small box, also made of ivory, containing tiny combs and a silver mirror. ④The doll had rings on her fingers and held a tiny key, which unlocked the box. ⑤Like children today, the younger members of Roman civilization would have dressed and undressed their dolls, and decorated their hair and fingers according to the latest fashions.



[24~27]다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. While the fine art object is valued because it is unique, it is also valued because it can be reproduced for                . For example, Van Gogh’s paintings have been reproduced endlessly on posters, postcards, coffee mugs, and T-shirts. Ordinary consumers can own a copy of the highly valued originals. Therefore, the value of the original results not only from its uniqueness but from its being the source from which reproductions are made. The manufacturers who produce art reproductions and the consumers who purchase and display them give value to the work of art by making it available to many people as an item of popular culture.
① art education	② artists’ imagination
③ cultural diversity	④ scholarly research
⑤ popular consumption



25. There are some people who believe that no one should be trusted. They usually feel this way because their behavior compels others to lie to them. In other words, they make it difficult for others to tell them the truth because they respond rudely or emotionally to people who tell the truth. If others see how angry, hurt, or hateful you become when they tell you the truth, they will avoid telling it to you at all costs. If you are known as someone who is easily offended, you will never know what others are really thinking or feeling because they will                 to escape from your negative reaction. If you demand that children tell you the truth and then punish them because it is not very satisfying, you teach them to lie to you to protect themselves.
① distort the truth	② protect their children
③ waste your expenses	④ hurt your feelings
⑤ reveal their anger
26. One of the main principles I follow when I draw outside is                                   . I try to stay away from houses or barns that have unusual angles of the roof, or objects that look incorrect in size, perspective, or design. If the subject is confusing when you look at it, it will be more confusing when you attempt to draw it. I know a beautiful barn where the corners are not at right angles. No matter how many times I have drawn it, the perspective does not look right. If I were to make an accurate drawing of this barn and put it in a show, I’m sure I would get all kinds of criticism for my poor perspective. I would not be there to tell my critics that the barn is actually constructed this way. So, I stay away from subjects that do not look right to me.
① to convert inaccurate drawings into accurate ones
② not to draw any objects that others have drawn
③ to draw an object with imagination
④ to get information from abstract subjects
⑤ not to select a subject that is too difficult or odd

27. When faced with things that are too big to sense, we comprehend them by                                 . The first appearance of a shining star in a darkening evening sky can take you out into the universe if you combine what you see with the twin facts that the star is merely one of the closest of the galaxy’s 200 billion stars and that its light began traveling decades ago. The smell of gasoline going into a car’s tank during a refueling stop, when combined with the fact that each day nearly a billion gallons of crude oil are refined and used in the United States, can allow our imagination to spread outward into the vast global network of energy trade and politics. [3점]
*crude oil: 원유
① adding knowledge to the experience
② understanding the energy policy of a nation
③ comparing the universe with human beings
④ associating the objects with their names
⑤ establishing the local network

28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The first experiments in television broadcasting began in France in the 1930s, but the French were slow to employ the new technology. There were several reasons for this (A)hesitancy/consistency. Radio absorbed the majority of state resources, and the French government was reluctant to shoulder the financial burden of developing national networks for television broadcasting. Television programming costs were too high, and program output correspondingly low. Poor (B)distribution/descriptioncombined with minimal offerings provided little incentive to purchase the new product. Further, television sets were priced beyond the means of a general public whose modest living standards, especially in the 1930s and 1940s, did not allow the acquisition of luxury goods. Ideological influences also factored in; elites in particular were (C)optimistic/skepticalof television, perceiving it as a messenger of mass culture and Americanization.
      (A)              (B)		        (C)
① hesitancy	……	distribution	……  optimistic
② hesitancy	……	distribution	……  skeptical
③ hesitancy	……	description	……  optimistic
④ consistency	……	description	……  optimistic
⑤ consistency	……	distribution	……  skeptical


29. 다음 바이올린 줄의 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]




A violin creates tension in its ①strings and gives each of them an equilibrium shape: a straight line. A tight violin string can be viewed as composed of many individual pieces that are connected in a chain as in the above two figures. When the string is ②straight, as in Figure 1, its tension is uniform, and the two outward forces on a given piece sum to zero; they have equal magnitudes and point in ③opposite directions. With no net forces acting on its pieces, the string is in equilibrium. But when the string is ④curved, as in Figure 2, the outward forces on its pieces no longer sum to zero. Although the string’s uniform tension still gives those outward forces equal magnitudes, they now point inslightly different directions, and each piece experiences a ⑤zero net force. The net forces on its pieces are restoring forces, which will cause the string to vibrate and thus make sounds.
*equilibrium: 평형   **magnitude: 크기


30. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘She’의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Her nerves were hurting her. She looked automatically again at the high, uncurtained windows. As night fell, she could just perceive outside a huge tree swinging its branches. The rain came flying on the window. Ah, why didn’t she have peace? These two men, her husband and her son, why did they not come? She wrapped a large scarf around her and hesitated for a moment. She opened the door and stepped out into the backyard. There was no sign of a light anywhere. She listened with all her ears but could hear nothing but the night. “James!―Shawn!” she called, but nothing came from the darkness.
① safe and relieved	② relaxed and comfortable
③ nervous and worried	④ satisfied and pleased
⑤ cold and indifferent
31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sheets of paper exist almost entirely for the purpose of carrying information, so we tend to think of them as neutral objects. We rarely interpret marks on paper as references to the paper itself.   (A)  , when we see the text, characters, and images on artifacts that serve other purposes, we generally interpret these marks as labels that do refer to their carriers. Natural objects do not come with labels, of course, but these days, most physical artifacts do.   (B)  , their designers have chosen to shift part of the burden of communication from the form and materials of the artifact itself to lightweight surface symbols. So, for example, a designer of door handles might not worry about communicating their functions through their shapes, but might simply mark them ‘push’ and ‘pull.’
*artifact: 인공물
     (A)		(B)
①However  ……	Otherwise
②However	……	That is
③Likewise	……	In contrast
④Besides	……	In contrast
⑤Besides	……	That is

[32~33] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
32. Many people believe that they will be free of their anger if they express it, and that their tears will release their pain. This belief derives from a nineteenth-century understanding of emotions, and it is no truer than the flat earth. It sees the brain as a steam kettle in which negative feelings build up pressure. But no psychologist has ever succeeded in proving the unburdening effects of the supposed safety valves of tears and anger. On the contrary, over forty years ago, controlled studies showed that fits of anger are more likely to intensify anger, and that tears can drive us still deeper into depression. Our heads do not resemble steam kettles, and our brains involve a much more complicated system than can be accounted for by images taken from nineteenth-century technology.
① 감정에 따른 두뇌 반응의 상이성
② 두뇌 구조와 우울증의 관계
③ 19세기 과학이 뇌신경학에 미친 영향
④ 감정 표출의 효과에 대한 오해
⑤ 눈물과 분노의 심리적 유사성

33. Knowing when something happened is important. Understanding why historic events took place is also important. To do this, historians often turn to geography. Weather patterns, the water supply, and the landscape of a place all affect the lives of the people who live there. For example, to explain why the ancient Egyptians developed a successful civilization, you must look at the geography of Egypt. Egyptian civilization was built on the banks of the Nile River, which flooded each year, depositing soil on its banks. The rich soil could help farmers grow enough crops to feed the people in the cities. That meant everyone did not have to farm, so some people could perform other jobs that helped develop the civilization.
① effects of the Nile River on Egyptian farming
② significance of geography in understanding history
③ differences between geography and geology
④ varieties of Egyptian civilization
⑤ development of Egyptian culture


34. 다음 글의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Nowadays, we can enjoy athletic competition of every kind without leaving our homes. It is the fun that comes from cheering on our team and celebrating its skills while complaining about the opposing team’s good luck. But some individuals sit and watch a football game or tennis match without cheering for anyone or any team. They are not willing to risk the possible disappointment of picking the loser, so they give up the possible joy of picking the winner. They live in the world of neutrality. Don’t be one of them. Sure, your team might lose. But then again, your team might win. Either way, your spectator experience will have been a fun one, and you will have avoided being merely a passive observer.
① 상대 팀의 승리에 찬사를 보내라.
② 한 팀을 정해서 응원하며 관전하라.
③ 운동경기는 경기장에 가서 즐겨라.
④ 중립적인 입장에서 경기를 분석하라.
⑤ 지나친 응원으로 상대 팀을 자극하지 마라.


35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?

The above graph shows changes in school enrollment rates of the population ages 3－19 by age group from 1970 to 2006. ①The enrollment rates of all age groups were higher than 50 percent in 2006. ②Of all age groups, the enrollment rate for youth ages 7－13 was the highest during the entire period covered by the graph. ③Of all age groups, the enrollment rate of children ages 5－6 increased the most from 1970 to 2006. ④The overall change in the enrollment rate from 1980 to 1990 was smaller for youth ages 14－17 than for youth ages 18－19. ⑤The lowest enrollment rate is seen in children ages 3－4 among all age groups for each year.
36. RPC에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? 
TheRPC,foundedin1996,describesitselfasa progressive organization fighting for social change. It is a multiracial, multi-issue, international membership organization. Its mission is to move the nation and the world towards social, racial, and economic justice. It has its headquarters inChicago,andmajorbranchesinWashington,D.C., New York, and Los Angeles. It has succeeded in registering hundreds of thousands of voters, helped elect many officials, mediated labor disputes, affected public policy in Haiti, and helped secure professional positions for minorities in a number of different fields. It also works on issues such as fair housing, gender equality, and environmental justice.
① 1996년에 설립된 보수 단체이다. 
② 임무는 인종 문제에 국한된다. 
③ 본부는 뉴욕과 로스앤젤레스에 있다.
④ Haiti의 공공 정책에 영향을 끼쳤다. 
⑤ 양성 평등과 환경 문제에는 관여하지 않는다.

37. sacred lotus에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? 
A water plant called the sacred lotus regulates its temperature in order to benefit insects that it needs to reproduce. When the plant flowers, it heats its blossoms to above 86℉ for as long as four days. It does so, even when the air is as cool as 50℉. The heat releases an aroma that attracts certain insects, which fly into the flower to feed on nectar and pollen. But according to Roger Seymour and Paul Schultze-Motel of Australia’s University of Adelaide, the heat does more: It rewards insects with a stable environment that enhances their ability to eat, mate, and prepare for flight. 
*nectar: (꽃의) 꿀   **pollen: 꽃가루
① 번식에 필요한 곤충을 이롭게 하기 위해 온도를 조절한다.
② 개화 시에는 꽃을 화씨 86도 이상까지 따뜻하게 한다.
③ 화씨 50도의 기온에서는 열을 내지 않는다.
④ 꽃의 열이 곤충을 유인하는 향기를 발산시킨다.
⑤ 꽃의 열이 곤충의 짝짓기 능력을 향상시키는 환경을 제공한다.

[38~39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. Old Hawk gestured up at the tall, old cottonwood. It was so large that a grown man could not put his arms around it. “This tree,” he said, “has stood guard over our family all its life. Strength is what I feel each time I look at it. Yet, there have been moments when its great strength was also its weakness.” “That’s hard to believe,” Jeremy said. “It’s the biggest tree for miles around.” Old Hawk pointed at the chokecherry trees in a dry river bed not far away. “Look there,” he said, “those chokecherry trees are small and weak in comparison to this cottonwood. But when you were a child, they survived a storm without losing a branch. This old cottonwood, on the other hand, lost several branches. It stood up to the storm, but it could not bend with the wind the way the chokecherry trees could.”
① 강한 것이 약한 것을 이긴다.
② 강점이 약점이 될 수도 있다.
③ 신념이 꿈을 실현시킨다.
④ 서식 환경이 나무의 용도를 결정한다.
⑤ 식물은 자연 재해를 막는 데 도움이 된다.


39. The specific combinations of foods in a cuisine and the ways they are prepared constitute a deep reservoir of accumulated wisdom about diet and health and place. In Latin America, for example, corn is traditionally eaten with beans; each plant is deficient in an essential amino acid that happens to be abundant in the other, so together corn and beans form a balanced diet in the absence of meat. Similarly, corn in Latin America is traditionally ground or soaked with limestone, which makes available a B vitamin in the corn, the absence of which would otherwise lead to a deficiency disease. Very often, when a society adopts a new food without the food culture surrounding it, as happened when corn first came to Europe, Africa, and Asia, people get sick. The context in which a food is eaten can be nearly as important as the food itself.
*limestone: 석회암
① 같은 종류의 채소라도 재배 지역에 따라 영양소가 다르다.
② 음식 문화의 전파는 문명의 전파 경로와는 관련이 없다. 
③ 지역 특산물 재배는 지역 경제 활성화에 도움이 된다.
④ 채소를 곁들인 육류의 섭취는 다이어트에 효과적이다.
⑤ 전통 음식 문화는 지역의 재료와 환경적 특성의 소산이다. 


40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? 

Now many kinds of superior coffee beans are being decaffeinated in ways that conserve strong flavor. But the public suffers from a groundless fear of chemical decaffeination and prefers instead to buy water-processed decaf.

(A)The solvent comes into direct contact with them, carrying the caffeine with it. The drained solvent is then mixed with water, and the caffeine is drawn out to be sold. 
(B)In the water process, however, no solvent touches the beans. After the beans are steamed, they are soaked in water, which removes the caffeine―along with all the soluble solids in the beans. The solution is drained off to a separate tank, where the caffeine is drawn out from it.
(C)Every process of decaffeination, whether chemical- or water-based, starts with steaming the green beans to loosen the bonds of caffeine. In the chemical process, a solvent circulates through the beans.
*solvent: 용매
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)
③ (B)-(C)-(A)	④ (C)-(A)-(B)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. Processing a TV message is much more like the all-at-once processing of the ear than the linear processing of the eye reading a printed page. According to McLuhan, television is fundamentally an acoustic medium. To make this point clear, he invited people to try a simple experiment. First, turn the sound down on the TV set for one minute during your favorite program. Now, for another minute, adjust the TV set so that you can hear the sound but you can’t see any picture. Which condition was more frustrating? Which condition gave you less information? McLuhan believed that people who tried this little exercise would invariably report more frustration in the condition where the picture was visible but the sound was inaudible.
① TV Messages: More Visual or Acoustic?
② Surveys of Favorite TV Programs
③ TV as Efficient Equipment for the Deaf
④ Effects of Advertisements on TV Viewers
⑤ More Frustrating Conditions: Invisible Situations

42. Most people have a vase or two in a cupboard, but lots of things can be turned into stylish containers for a flower arrangement, so before you rush out to buy anything, look around your own home. For instance, goldfish bowls look stunning filled with flower heads or petals, magnifying their contents. Wine, milk, mineral water, or olive oil bottles look particularly good with one or two stems in them. Try a collection of bottles in various shapes and sizes, lined up on a shelf or grouped on a table. An old teapot which has lost its lid becomes an ideal container for a bunch of roses picked from the garden.
① Flower Arrangements and Gardening
② Tips for Planting Flowers in the Garden
③ Decorating a Dining Table with Various Plants
④ Color: The Starting Point for Decoration
⑤ Ordinary Things as Flower Containers

43. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은? 
In Pamplona, a white-walled, sun-baked town high up in the hills of Navarre, is held in the first two weeks of July each year the World’s Series of bull fighting. The cafes under the wide arcades that run around the Plaza de la Constitucion have every table crowded. All day and all night there is dancing in the street. Bands of blue-shirted farmers circle and lift and swing behind a drum and various wind instruments in the ancient Basque Riau-Riau dances. And at night there is the beat of the big drums and the military band as the whole town dances in the great open square of the Plaza. 
① sad and desperate	② urgent and scary
③ merry and festive	④ gloomy and miserable
⑤ calm and peaceful
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

One grandmother hires her grandchildren to help with gardening chores.

Whether their grandchildren have special needs or not, grandparents shouldn’t overlook the value of incidental learning experiences. (①) Every day, opportunities exist in the form of errands, meal preparation, and chores. (②) At the farmers’ market, for example, a child might discover a new meaning for the word ‘ears’ when choosing corn. (③) Similarly, when filling the tank at the gas station, older children can compare prices and practice estimation, asking questions such as “How much do you think it will cost to fill the tank?” (④) As a result, they can learn the names of flowers and understand the tools and processes involved in growing vegetables. (⑤) Activities like these also enhance the value of hard work and persistence.


45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Everywhere in the world, the issue of how to manage urban growth poses the highest stakes, complex policy decisions, and strongly heated conflicts in the public area. The contrast between Western Europe and America is particularly sharp. In Western Europe, steep gasoline taxes, investment policies favoring built-up areas over undeveloped greenfields, continuous investment in public transportation, and other policies have produced relatively compact cities. Cities in Western Europe tend to be economically healthy compared with their suburbs. By contrast, in the United States, cheap gas, massive highway investment, policies that favor construction on the edges of cities, and heavy reliance on property taxes to fund public schools have encouraged much more car-reliant and spread-out urban areas, where eight in ten Americans now live. 
*stake: 위험 부담
󰀻
Different     (A)     resulted in relatively     (B)     
cities in Western Europe but resulted in spread-out urban areas in the United States.
           (A)  			  (B)
① public policies	……	centralized 
② transportation systems	……	decentralized
③ market demands	……	decentralized 
④ tax systems	……	decentralized 
⑤ economic capacities	……	centralized
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)One Saturday during the summer, I asked my father if he would go down to the schoolyard and play basketball with me. I had just finished the fifth grade, and wanted desperately to make the middle school team the coming fall. (a)I couldn’t believe my ears when he called for my mother and sister to come along, for, in the traditional fashion, my mother was the house accountant, the launderer, and, of course, the cook.
(B)She turned from the basket and began heading the other way. (b)“Um-mah,” I cried at her, my irritation already bubbling over, “the basket’s over here!” After a few steps she turned around, and from where the professional three-point line must be now, she effortlessly flipped the ball up in the air, its flight truer and higher than I’d witnessed from any boy or man. The ball curved cleanly into the basket, stiffly popping the chain-link net. All afternoon, she rained in shot after shot, as my father and I ran after her. 
(C)When we got home from the playground, my mother showed me the photograph album of her high school days. I was shocked to learn that she had been the top player for the national high school team that once won the all-Asia championships. (c)For years I kept it in my room, on the same shelf that housed the scrapbooks I made of basketball stars, with magazine clippings of great players such as Bubbles Hawkins, Pistol Pete, and George Gervin.
(D)When we arrived, my sister immediately ran off to the swings, and (d)I recall being annoyed that my mother wasn’t following her. I dribbled awkwardly around the free-throw line, almost losing control of the ball, and made a flat shot that bounced wildly off the basket. The ball fell to my father, who took a few not so graceful dribbles and missed an easy layup. (e)He rebounded his shot and passed the ball to my mother, who had been watching us from the foul line.
*layup: (골 근처에서 한 손으로 하는) 레이업 슛

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C)	② (C)-(B)-(D)
③ (C)-(D)-(B)	④ (D)-(B)-(C)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)

47. 위 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 필자 ‘I’는 새로 결성된 중학교 농구팀 대표 선수였다. 
② 필자 ‘I’의 어머니는 대부분의 슛을 실패했다.
③ 필자 ‘I’는 어머니의 고교 시절 사진을 끝내 보지 못했다.
④ 필자 ‘I’의 어머니는 누이와 함께 그네를 탔다.
⑤ 필자 ‘I’의 아버지는 레이업 슛을 성공하지 못했다.
48. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 어머니에 대한 필자 ‘I’의 존경심이 가장 잘 드러난 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.

Some scientists have shown the practical power of looking at the world through ‘could-be’eyes. When a group of students were shown an unfamiliar rubbery object and told, “This could be a dog’s chewy toy,” they were later able to see that it might also be of use as an eraser when they made some pencil mistakes. In contrast, students who were told that it was a dog’s chewy toy did not find its alternative use. 
Another group of students watched a video about physics after being told, “This presents only one of several outlooks on physics. Please feel free to use any additional methods you want to assist you in solving the problems.” On tests of factual comprehension, these students performed no differently from students who had watched the video with a different introduction: “This presents the outlook on physics. Please use the method you see in the video in solving the problems.” But when they were faced with questions that asked them to use the information more creatively, the ‘could-be’ students performed much better than the others. Just a simple            of language seemed to invite the students to process and store information in a much more flexible format, and thus be able to look at it and make use of it in different ways.

49. 위 글의 밑줄 친 ‘could-be’eyes의 의미로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 인생에 대한 긍정적 시각	② 과거에 대한 성찰
③ 사물에 대한 열린 시각	④ 실수를 두려워하는 마음
⑤ 타인을 배려하는 마음

50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① memory	② criticism
③ definition	④ imitation
⑤ change


2009학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지

제 3 교시       외국어(영어) 영역
 

성명


수험번호





3




                

◦문제지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 쓰시오.
◦답안지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 쓰고, 또 수험 번호와 답을 정확히 표시하시오.
◦문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을 참고하시오. 1점과 3점 문항에만 점수가 표시되어 있습니다. 점수 표시가 없는 문항은 모두 2점입니다.


1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.


1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 로고를 고르시오. [1점]

①
②
③






④
⑤






2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① bored	② proud	③ nervous
④ envious	⑤ lonely

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오.
① bowl 	② box 	③ can
④ tube 	⑤ basket

4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to print a road map out for her
② to buy a birthday present for her
③ to drive her to her friend’s house
④ to inform her of the weather condition 
⑤ to help her put snow chains on the car

5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $72	② $77	③ $80	④ $85	⑤ $90
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 테니스공 기증을 요청하려고
② 스트레칭 방법을 알려주려고
③ 병원 시설에 대해 안내하려고
④ 테니스의 장점에 대해 설명하려고
⑤ 환자들에게 주의 사항을 당부하려고

7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① to sell tickets for the play
② to put up posters on the wall
③ to review the script of the play
④ to edit the program for the play
⑤ to act in the play instead of him

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 서점 주인 - 고객	② 비서 - 사장
③ 출판사 직원 - 저자	④ 독자 - 비평가
⑤ 편집장 - 사진 기자

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
① 무용실	② 방송실 	③ 미술실
④ 가사 실습실	⑤ 과학 실습실

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일을 고르시오.
① 좌석 위치 확인하기	② 영수증 보관하기
③ 극장 위치 알려주기	④ 프로그램 구입하기
⑤ 다음 공연 티켓 구하기

11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]

①
②
③
④
⑤

12. St. George High School Cheerleading Team에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 전국 대회에서 3년 연속 우승을 차지했다.
② 현재 20명의 선수와 1명의 매니저가 있다.
③ 여름 방학 중에는 연습을 하지 않는다.
④ 연습은 일주일에 세 번 방과 후에 실시한다.
⑤ 학교 행사나 경기가 있을 때는 추가 연습이 있다.

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.

①	②	③	④	⑤

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:                                                  
① Yes. I’m trying to make myself feel at ease.
② OK. I’ll arrange your appointment around that time.
③ What a pity! I’m fed up with such a conference.
④ Sounds perfect. I’ll be back at three in the afternoon.
⑤ It’s the scariest to me to go see a dentist.

15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:                                                      
① You already have a lot of scarves in the closet.
② I think you should change the gloves for larger ones.
③ I’m sure your mom will like the blue scarf very much.
④ You should have bought a necktie instead of the scarf.
⑤ If you give him a call and tell the truth, he’ll understand.

16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:                                                   
① Alright. Make sure you don’t get hurt.
② You have to give it back in an hour.
③ Camping is not allowed here in the park.
④ Why not? I’d like to go hiking for a change.
⑤ Thanks. Tell your dad we’re waiting for him.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ms. Green이 Henry에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Ms. Green:                                          
① I’ll print out the questions for you.
② Take a deep breath before the test.
③ How did you do in your math exam?
④ How often do you visit the school website?
⑤ You have to change your password regularly.





이제 듣기․말하기 문제는 다 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
You experience displeasure while using various types of products or services. You think determining liability for your displeasure is difficult and the amount of monetary loss is small. You also don’t know where to go to handle the displeasure and where to receive compensation. However, you are eager to deal with these situations. This is where you can get help. It provides you with counseling and handles your complaints related to various fields such as automobiles, housing and facilities, publications, services, finance and insurance, law, and medicine. This also demands payment for you from a corporation based on the Compensation Criteria for Consumers’ Damages.
*liability 책임이 있음
① 취업알선센터	② 부정부패고발센터
③ 소비자보호센터	④ 과소비추방운동본부
⑤ 자연재해대책본부




19. 밑줄 친 He[he]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Tom and his colleague, Sue, were attending a conference for music teachers in New York. While at the conference ①he purchased a talking metronome, a device for counting the beats in a song. Before Tom and Sue boarded their flight home, Tom put his carry­on bag on the security­check conveyor belt. The security guard’s eyes widened as ②he watched the monitor. He asked Tom what ③he had in the bag. Then the guard slowly pulled out of the bag the device covered with dials and switches. “It’s a talking metronome,” Tom insisted. “Look, I’ll show you.” ④He took the box and flipped a switch. “One, two, three,……” said the metronome in perfect time. The guard breathed a sigh of relief. Sue whispered to Tom as ⑤he gathered his belongings, “Aren’t you glad it didn’t go ‘Three, two, one,……’?”
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I feel a little overwhelmed now by all the “new” in my life. New job. New apartment. New neighborhood. But the best “new” is a new perspective. I don’t have to tell you how desperate I was feeling. When things started to go from bad to worse, I almost felt numb. That is, until you came on the scene. I just can’t thank you enough for all the time you’ve spent with me. Calling everyone in your network to help me locate a new job here. Coaching me on the interview. The hours you’ve spent on my behalf seem like an incredible gift. Your love and concern feel like a warm blanket on those long nights as I adjust to my new life.
① 과중한 업무량에 대해 호소하려고
② 이사 온 지역에 관한 정보를 물으려고
③ 업무상 필요한 사람의 소개를 요청하려고
④ 새로 구한 일자리에 대한 정보를 물으려고
⑤ 힘든 시기에 도움을 준 것에 대해 감사하려고

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
If properly stored, broccoli will stay fresh for up to four days. The best way to store fresh bunches (A)is / are to refrigerate them in an open plastic bag in the vegetable compartment, which will give them the right balance of humidity and air, and help preserve the vitamin C content. Don’t wash the broccoli before storing it since moisture on its surface (B)encourages / to encourage the growth of mold. However, like most vegetables, it is at its best condition when used within a day or two after the purchase. Preparing broccoli is extremely easy, so all you have to do is boil it in water just until it (C)is / will be tender, three to five minutes.
	     (A)				     (B)		           (C)
①	is	…	encourages	 …	is
②	is	…	to encourage	 …	will be
③	is	…	encourages	 …	will be
④	are	…	to encourage    …	will be
⑤	are	…	encourages	 …	is

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
In business settings, it’s really easy to forget ①to take the time to say Thank­You, and yet, it’s an essential part of interaction with others. It’s important to people that they feel valid, important, and ②respected. Just as saying sorry matters, so does ③remember to thank those who help you move forward. And I think it’s much nicer to send along a physical card than an email. A personal note written by your own hand matters ④far more than a few lines of typing into a window that’s so easily available at your fingertips. One more thing: if you’re going to go this route, put in the extra few minutes to purchase a nice card and ⑤use a pen that gives you a decent flow.
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Ending your shower with cold water can be good for your health. ①Warm water makes the blood rush to your skin, and cool water makes the blood rush to your organs. ②This switching between hot and cold triggers better circulation by forcing the blood to move. ③The ideal practice would be to switch numerous times between hot and cold water, but merely ending the shower with cold water does help with circulation. ④Taking frequent showers in fact can cause skin problems and other infections. ⑤Good circulation improves the performance of your system and thus makes you look and feel better. 



[24～27] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
24. One of the most important aspects of green products should be           . If something is tough or can be readily repaired, this lessens the chance that it’ll end up in the landfill, and could easily save you money in the long run, even if it’s initially more expensive. Even recyclable materials, if they break and can’t be fixed, require energy and other resources to reprocess and then replace. Long­lasting goods can be passed on from person to person. Even if your style changes and that kitchen table isn’t your thing anymore, a good strong table will almost always be appealing to someone else, while a broken and unfixable one probably won’t.
① uniqueness	② cleanliness	③ mobility	
④ durability	⑤ beauty


25. A new study suggests that kids might be at increased risk of getting the disease of the lungs depending on                                         . Looking at more than 95,000 infants born from 1995 to 2000, researchers followed the children through 2005. What they found was those born in the autumn were nearly 30% more likely to get asthma. The researchers say it’s because babies born in the fall months are much more likely to get common wintertime infections. At birth, infants have protection against certain diseases because antibodies have passed from the mother to her unborn baby. But the protection is temporary. So, as their immunities fade, babies become more subject to infections, especially in the winter months when all kinds of germs are swirling through the air.                        *asthma 천식
① where they live
② when they were born
③ what sports they like
④ what they usually eat
⑤ how healthy their parents are
26. El Sistema, which is known as one of the most successful social inclusion projects, is a national network of youth orchestras and music centers in Venezuela. About three decades ago, José Antonio Abreu developed the idea of　　　　　　　　　　                               　 , in order to offer children from poor neighborhoods an alternative to life on the streets. In the dangerous and poverty‐stricken slums of Caracas, Abreu lifted children out of despair through music, changing both people and the system of the society. In 1975 he established the first Venezuelan youth orchestra with 12 children. Since then he has built up a network of orchestras and music centers through the whole country. Currently 250,000 children and young adults are playing a musical instrument, and by 2012 these numbers will have doubled. 
① building libraries for the public
② combining social work with music
③ founding a food relief organization
④ developing vocational education policies
⑤ organizing an international movie festival

27. Much is now known about natural hazards and the negative impacts they have on people and their property. It would seem obvious that any logical person would avoid such potential impacts or at least modify their behavior or their property to minimize such impacts. However,                                                              . Until someone has a personal experience or knows someone who has such an experience, most people subconsciously believe “It won’t happen here” or “It won’t happen to me.” Even knowledgeable scientists who are aware of the hazards, the odds of their occurrence, and the costs of an event do not always act appropriately. [3점]
① humans are not always rational
② people can overcome natural disasters
③ experience can sometimes cause prejudice
④ every human doesn’t experience misfortune
⑤ scientists know the solutions to natural hazards 

28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Can you identify others’ personality from colors they like? Some psychologists actually use personality tests based on color (A)conference / preference. These color psychologists have generally thought that outgoing, adventurous, and competitive people like bold, bright colors. Conversely, people who like softer tones are more likely to exhibit a quieter, gentler nature. While there is some truth in such (B)assumptions / exceptions, you should remember that people from various backgrounds and experiences will be attracted to certain colors and be offended by others. Therefore, color psychology, although interesting, provides only broad (C)regulations / generalizations in analyzing personality types.
      (A)               (B)               (C)
① conference   …   assumptions   …   regulations
② conference   …   exceptions    …   regulations
③ conference   …   exceptions    …   generalizations
④ preference   …   assumptions   …   generalizations
⑤ preference   …   exceptions     …   generalizations

29. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

Years ago I saw a woman showing her magic powers. She filled a glass with water, then ①covered it with her handkerchief, previously dipped in water. She pushed down the center of the cloth, ②inverted the glass on her right palm, then seized it with her left hand. Air pressure ballooned the cloth ③upward inside the glass. “When I put my finger on the glass,” she explained, “it will make the water boil.” When she did so, bubbles began ④rising. You could even hear the surface bubbling! What happened was this. When she pushed with her finger, the glass slipped downward through her left hand, causing the handkerchief to slide upward on the outside. This ⑤raised the center of the cloth inside, forming a vacuum. The vacuum drew air through the handkerchief and created an illusion of boiling water.

30. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
It is said that a cozy hat is a must on a cold winter’s day. We are often led to believe that most of our body heat is lost through our heads. Closer inspection of heat loss in the hatless,     (A)    , reveals that is nonsense. The myth has arisen through a flawed interpretation of an experiment in the 1950s. In the study, volunteers were dressed in Arctic survival suits and exposed to bitterly cold conditions. Because the head was the only part of their bodies left uncovered, most of their heat was lost through their heads.    (B)   , covering one part of the body has as much effect as covering any other. If the experiment had been performed with people wearing only swimming trunks, they would have lost no more than 10% of their body heat through their heads.
       (A)                   (B)
① therefore	    ……     In fact
② therefore     ……     Similarly
③ for example   ……     Similarly
④ however      ……     In fact
⑤ however      ……     For example
31. 다음 글에 드러난 필자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
When I moved into a two‐bedroom flat with Ally, I thought we could get on well. Initially, everything seemed fine. Then, as the weeks passed, things began to change. When I went out, she’d sneak into my room and read my journal. She would put on my clothes and cosmetics without my permission. Once, she took off all the framed photos of mine, which were very important to me, and hung a large frame of abstract painting instead. It was the last straw, however, when she started spreading rumors; she told my friends that I got addicted to computer games, which wasn’t true. When I confronted her, she denied it. But I couldn’t stand her any more.
① safe and relieved	② upset and annoyed
③ bored and indifferent	④ pleased and grateful
⑤ excited and anticipating


[32～33] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
32. Trust is the basis of all transactions. It’s the basis of the economy. World Bank economist Stephen Knack has long studied the economics of trust. According to him, the huge disparity in income between the United States and Somalia can be explained entirely as a disparity in trust. Put differently, the income enjoyed by the American people is 0.5 percent the result of hard work and 99.5 percent the result of trust. While that sounds extreme, there’s something to it if you consider how market transactions and business activities are impossible without it. Without adequate trust, the cost of transactions rises and there are even times when mutually beneficial transactions cannot be realized.
*disparity 불균형
① 전자 상거래의 보편화
② 신용거래의 잠재적 위험성
③ 국가 간 빈부 격차의 심화
④ 정치가 경제에 미치는 영향
⑤ 경제 활동에서 신뢰의 중요성


33. We think of butterfly wings as being colorful, but many are relatively drab on the underside. Some butterflies protect themselves through camouflage－by folding up their wings, they reveal the undersides and blend in with their surroundings. Through this strategy, they become nearly invisible to predators. Some other butterflies are brightly and distinctively colored, but they taste nasty. A bird that eats one of these butterflies remembers the experience－and avoids repeating it. Now other species of butterfly that do not taste nasty mimic the nasty ones. They are born looking like them in color and shape but not taste. Birds and lizards, who have learned to avoid bold warning coloration, leave these imitators alone.                     *drab 칙칙한 갈색의
① why butterflies travel long distances
② how butterflies find their food
③ how butterflies fool their predators
④ why birds and lizards like butterflies
⑤ why butterflies don’t have nests

34. 다음 글의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
These days, lots of young people are worried about their future because of the economic recession. More seriously, even experts can’t predict what’s going to happen in the near future. They just say the financial crisis won’t be solved easily unlike the past. So, most young people, including recent graduates, have difficulty in getting jobs. Then, is there no way out? They should change direction! It’s time  for them to turn their eyes to the other side of the world. They don’t necessarily have to realize their dreams home. Instead, they need to change their stage to perform on for their future. Of course, there are risks involved. However, they can’t move forward if they are afraid of the risks.  
① 경제와 관련된 상식을 넓혀라.
② 인생의 목표를 구체적으로 정하라.
③ 전문가들의 조언을 귀담아 들어라.
④ 취업을 위해 해외로 시선을 돌려라.
⑤ 특화된 기술 개발로 창업을 준비하라.

35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?

The graph above shows Americans’ ratings of their life today compared with their life five years ago. ①The percentage of people who said their life was better off was always higher than that of those who responded negatively. ②Especially, between 1994 and 2002, more than half the respondents answered they were better off than five years ago. ③In 1990, the percentage of those who answered positively was nearly twice as high as that of those who answered negatively. ④From 1990 to 1996, the gap between the rates of the two groups increased steadily. In 1996, the highest percentage of people had the positive view of their life. ⑤However, the year 2008 showed that about two-thirds of the respondents had the negative view of their life.
36. FTF에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The FTF is a trade association that promotes fair trade. The FTF traces its roots to the late 1970s when many individual trade organizations began holding yearly conferences on fair trade. In 1994, they incorporated formally as the NAATO and, the following year, changed its name to the FTF. It envisions a just and sustainable global economic system in which purchasing and production choices are made with concern for the well­being of people and the environment. It seeks to reduce poverty by continually and significantly expanding the practice of trade that values the labor and dignity of all people.
① 세계 무역 박람회 개최를 계기로 설립되었다.
② 1970년대에 일시적으로 해체되기도 하였다.
③ 유사한 성격을 가진 NAATO와 경쟁하였다.
④ 인류의 복지 증진과 환경에 관심을 기울인다.
⑤ 인력 감축을 통한 비용 절감을 추구한다.


37. snowy plover에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The snowy plover is one of the hardest birds to spot on the beach. Once numbering in the thousands, the species is listed as endangered in several states now. Beige and white, snowy plovers blend perfectly in the white sand. They eat tiny flies that live on the sand or mud flats. Their nests usually contain three tiny eggs, which look like sand and are barely visible to even the most well­trained eye. Mothers incubate the nests during the day and fathers at night. Chicks can get out of their nest within three hours of hatching. They walk, run, and swim well but still require their parents’ care after hatching.
① 멸종 위기에 처한 종으로 등록되어 있다.
② 흰 모래밭에서는 눈에 잘 띄지 않는다.
③ 둥지에는 보통 3개의 작은 알이 들어있다.
④ 낮에는 암컷이, 밤에는 수컷이 알을 품는다.
⑤ 부화한 지 3시간 내에 어미를 떠나 독립한다.



[38～39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. Did I remember to turn the stove off? Did I remember to lock the front door? I’d better look again. We all feel the need to check again sometimes, to reassure ourselves that we didn’t neglect a possibly dangerous problem. But for some people, checking can consume hours every day, driven by intense fears of unlikely scenarios. A teacher continually searches the floor, obsessed with the idea that a dropped needle might injure her students. A man spends an hour every morning verifying that all the doors and windows are shut before he leaves for work. Yet this habit of checking doesn’t solve the worry at all, doubt still grows, and if it gets worse, it can lead to medical treatment.
① Care killed the cat.
② Every dog has his day.
③ Opportunity only knocks once.
④ Two’s company, three’s a crowd.
⑤ One man’s music is another man’s noise.







39. The saying, “To err is human, to forgive, divine,” shows the ideal we should have: people should be forgiving of other’s mistakes. To err or to make mistakes is indeed a part of being human but it seems that most people don’t want to accept the responsibility for having made a mistake. Rather, they are likely to do the opposite-to find someone else to shift the blame to. They naturally look for someone else who could be responsible for the problem. So the twisted version of the saying “To err is human. To blame the other guy is more human.” is meant to be a joke and yet it gives us more information about human nature.
① 인간은 잘못에 대한 책임을 전가하는 경향이 있다.
② 인간은 남의 잘못을 통해 교훈을 얻는다. 
③ 인간은 죄의식에서 벗어나려고 신에게 의지한다.
④ 인간은 의지가 약하기 때문에 실수를 하게 된다.
⑤ 인간은 끊임없는 선택을 하며 살아간다.





40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? 

A group of scientists has devised a procedure for locating infections without surgery.  

(A)The white blood cells are injected back into the body, and a special camera is used to pick up signals from the indium­Ⅲ. Since white blood cells fight infection, they will travel to the infected area, producing a signal from the region.
(B)They take a blood sample from a patient, and they isolate the white blood cells and mix them with a radioactive element, indium­Ⅲ.
(C)The location of the signal discloses to the doctor where the infection is and how critical it is. The doctor can then select a treatment without hesitation.
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)
③ (B)-(C)-(A)	④ (C)-(A)-(B)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
41.Organizations like the National Audubon Society once encouraged interest in birds, and bird watching became a popular pastime and a favorite way to spend leisure time. Unfortunately, the growth of interest has affected the birds themselves. One rare bird can bring a flock of bird watchers. Both vegetation and nesting places have been trampled by feet of overenthusiastic bird watchers. Birds are naturally shy; the presence of too many people can cause them to abandon a nest and eggs in it. For example, a black hawk was so upset by the people gathering to see it return to its nest that it laid only one egg in its nest in five years.          *trample 짓밟다
① Shyness: Nature of Rare Birds
② Qualities of Good Bird Watchers
③ Bird Watching: Real Harm to Birds
④ More Attention to Bird Migration
⑤ Tips for Keeping Birds as Pets

42.There is plenty of evidence that second­hand smoke-breathed when you are in the same room as someone smoking-can be harmful, particularly to children, and some parents adopt a strategy of never smoking in their child’s presence. According to a researcher, however, this would not offer complete protection because there can be third­hand smoke. Toxic particles in cigarette smoke can remain on nearby surfaces, as well as the hair and clothing of the smoker, long after the cigarette has been put out, and small children are easily influenced because they are likely to breathe in close proximity, or even lick and suck them. Therefore, it is vital that people are made aware of the possible risks associated with smoking on the health of children.         *proximity 근접
① Don’t Smoke Your Life Away
② Air Pollution Caused by Smoking
③ Warning over Third­hand Smoke
④ Dangers of Breathing in Toxic Air
⑤ The Increase of Non­smoking Areas

43. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
It was dark outside, and rain fell in icy torrents. Inside, the three children sat around their grandfather, the only light in the room coming from an old lantern that sat on the rough, wooden table. The children were captivated by his every word as his low voice poured out tales of pirates, treasure and the sea. They were certain they could hear the sound of the rough wind hurling the surf against the rocks. Though it was cold and wet outside in their imaginations, inside it was warm and dry, and one by one the children’s eyes began to close. With gentle hands, the grandfather carried them up to their beds and tucked them in.
① sad and gloomy	② busy and festive
③ messy and noisy	④ tense and urgent
⑤ cozy and peaceful
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

The study also suggests that luck is a matter of interpretation.

Successful people often say that “you make your own luck,” and the results from a study suggest that this is true. (①) If people believe that they are lucky, then they are more likely to continue trying until they succeed at something. ( ② ) Those who think they are unlucky, on the other hand, do the opposite. (③) They rarely try something new because they “know” they will not win, and therefore they can never succeed. (④) When one of the subjects fell down the stairs and broke his arm, he did not think that this was unlucky. (⑤) On the contrary, he actually felt extremely fortunate-if he had fallen differently, he might have broken his neck. 




45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

Today, the common store of information and knowledge is more complex and more accessible. The accessibility of them through the Internet is now much more the domain of the young, the masters of the new cybernetic world. However, wisdom’s domain lies in another direction. Wisdom is not exclusively about information and knowledge, but about “context,” and in this arena the young must often still yield to the old. Why? Because when it comes to the essentials of living, it is clear we haven’t made as much progress since ancient times. Wisdom moves slowly because it takes a lifetime to acquire. In fact, it is the paradox of wisdom, that the faster we try to master it, the slower it comes to us. Wisdom mostly remains the domain of the elders, and the technology revolution has not diminished our need for them.


󰀻

Though technology revolution allows the young to have      (A)   in knowledge and information, they should         (B)    the elders for wisdom.

      (A)                 (B)
① superiority  ……     consult    
② options      …… 	   dismiss
③ difficulties   ……     consult
④ faith        ……     dismiss
⑤ interest     ……     judge
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)It was December 1972. I had been head football coach at Pennsylvania State University for almost seven years. Then that unexpected phone call had come. The man on the phone was Bill Sullivan, principal owner of the New England Patriots. “I want to meet with you to talk about coaching my team,” he said. (a)He hit me with his package-$1.3 million, plus part ownership of the franchise. 
(B) From the moment of that nighttime revelation, I knew what college football means to me-and what pro football never could mean. I love winning games as much as any coach does, but I know there’s something that counts more than victory or defeat. (b)I get to watch my players grow-in their personal discipline, in their educational development, and as human beings. That is a deep, lasting reward that I could never get in pro ball.
(C)I pretended I was asleep. I lay there thinking about the life I was leaving. I saw the school where I had met my wife and got married, the only home our five kids had ever known. I saw my thick­necked, fragile­hearted football players. What had made me tell Sullivan I’d come? (c)Yes, Boston was a great city and it was a new challenge. But it was ... the money. Suddenly I knew what it was I had to do, what it was I wanted to do. In the morning, I told Sue, “You went to bed with a millionaire, but you woke up with me. I’m not going.” 
(D)(d)Sullivan’s offer made me dizzy. In the end, I told my wife, “I have to take the job.” “Joe, whatever you want to do will be fine with me,” Sue replied. (e)I called Sullivan and told him we had a deal. When Sue and I went to bed that evening, I was pleased. At 2:00 a.m., Sue was sitting in her rocking chair nursing our baby. I’m sure she thought I was asleep. She had never said she didn’t want to go to Boston. But now tears were slipping down her face.
*revelation 계시

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C)	② (C)-(B)-(D)
③ (C)-(D)-(B)	④ (D)-(B)-(C)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)


47. 위 글의 필자에 대한 내용으로 일치하는 것은?
① 프로 축구팀의 코치를 맡고 있었다.
② 결국 Sullivan의 제안을 거절하기로 결심했다.
③ 가족과 떨어져 혼자 살고 있었다.
④ 자녀 교육을 위해 자주 이사를 다녔다.
⑤ 보스턴에서 아내를 만나 결혼하였다.
48. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 직업에 대한 필자 ‘I’의 가치관이 가장 잘 드러난 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)



[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
There is a famous psychology experiment to help us understand how opinions and judgements can be formed. The general experiment procedure was devised by Dr. Asch in the U.S. What happens is this: A volunteer is asked to join a group for the study of the discrimination of length. And he goes to a room where a number of people and the experimenter are seated. The volunteer doesn’t know that the other people in the room are researchers working together with the experimenter. A pair of cards is introduced. On one of them there is a line and on the other, three lines. Of these three, one is clearly longer than the line on the other card, one is shorter and one the same length. Seeing the cards, everyone is in turn asked which of the three lines on the second card is equal to the line on the first. They all pick-as they have been told to pick-the wrong line. Last of all, comes the turn of our volunteer. In many cases the volunteer, faced with the opinion of the group, denies the plain evidence of his senses and picks the same one as others do. This experiment shows even the sane and ordinary people could be made to deny the obvious facts, feeling the pressure to        . The people around you, “the pressure group” can have a great influence on your judgement and decisions. 

49. 위 글의 밑줄 친 the wrong line의 의미로 가장 적절한 것은? 
① 부모의 지나친 간섭	② 다수의 잘못된 의견 
③ 실험의 현실적 한계	④ 사회적 책임의 회피
⑤ 편협한 사고의 맹점


50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
① prepare  	② restart
③ conform	④ criticize 
⑤ memorize




※확인 사항
  문제지와 답안지의 해당란을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.


1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 사용할 표지판을 고르시오. [1점]


2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① proud 	② jealous 	③ curious 
④ worried 	⑤ nervous 

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. 
① a cartoon 	② a brochure	③ a headline 
④ an editorial 	⑤ a photograph 

4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① to park her car 
② to give him a ride 
③ to fix the broken bicycle 
④ to take his son to a doctor 
⑤ to inform him of the repair expenses 

5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 선물 값으로 여자에게 주어야 할 금액을 고르시오. [3점] 
① $18   ② $20   ③ $36  ④ $40   ⑤ $50

6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① 야생 동물 보호의 중요성을 강조하려고
② 동물 실험 윤리 강화에 대해 홍보하려고
③ 애완 동물 응급 처치 요령을 설명하려고
④ 여름철 애완 동물 관리 방법을 안내하려고 
⑤ 동물 애호가 협회에 대한 지원을 촉구하려고

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① 친구에게 전화하기
② 전화번호 알려주기
③ 전화기 수리 맡기기
④ 휴대전화기 분실신고하기
⑤ 고객에게 메시지 전달하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
① 정육점 주인 ─ 손님 
② 식당 지배인 ─ 웨이터 
③ 음식점 주인 ─ 배달원
④ 비행기 승무원 ─ 승객
⑤ 학교 영양사 ─ 조리사 

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오. 
① 운동화 빨래방 	② 구두 수선점
③ 발 전문 병원		④ 기차역 매표소
⑤ 디자인 학교 

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① 박물관 방문하기 	② 사진기 찾아오기 
③ 도시락 주문하기 	④ 건전기 교환하기 
⑤ 아침 식사 준비하기 

11. 다음 일정표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 보게 될 경기를 고르시오.


12. 다음을 듣고, Community Service Award에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 올해의 시상은 졸업한 선배가 한다.
② 지원 자격은 지역 사회봉사 40시간 이상이다.
③ 자기 자신뿐만 아니라 친구도 추천할 수 있다.
④ 지원서는 학교 홈페이지에서 내려 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 지원서 제출 마감일은 5월 6일이다.


13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  

① 	② 	③ 	④ 	⑤

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man : ___________________________
① Okay. I’ll tell Jane to fill in for you. 
② Great! She’d love to take the position. 
③ I promise I’ll consider your resignation. 
④ Good, but you should withdraw your resignation. 
⑤ Thank you. I’ll find someone as soon as possible. 

15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Woman : ____________________________
① Probably not. He needs all the rest he can get. 
② I don’t think he can. His plane is arriving soon. 
③ No. He didn’t say anything when he left this morning. 
④ Of course, he can. He should be at the theater by now. 
⑤ He already left to buy flowers for your performance. 

16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man : ____________________________
① You need to learn to motivate your students better. 
② Please make sure to turn in your homework today. 
③ That’s exactly what I need. So how do I join? 
④ Welcome. What activities would you like to sign up for? 
⑤ My group members have been very cooperative with me. 

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Michael이 Sam에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Michael : _______________________________
① How about joining a health club? 
② Lucky you! I wish I could be like you. 
③ You look tired. You should stop working out. 
④ Be patient. Everyone’s progress is different. 
⑤ Do you want to be my workout partner? 


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?[1점]
This started as early as 8000 B.C. During the New Stone Age as people began to settle into fixed agricultural communities, this intensified. Originally raised mainly for their meat, sheep and goats became valuable also for their milk and wool. Cattle were domesticated both for meat and skin and as work animals for agriculture. Their milk production was not a factor until much later in history when breeding for high milk production produced suitable cows. Horses were also domesticated and became important for transportation and came to play a major part in warfare.
① 축산  ② 조경 ③ 수송 ④ 임업 ⑤ 수렵

19. 밑줄 친 She[she]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? [1점]
A woman stopped at a flower shop to order some flowers to be wired to her mother who lived 100 miles away. As ① she got out of her car, she noticed a girl sitting on the street sobbing. The woman asked the girl what was wrong and she replied, "I wanted to buy a red rose for my mother, but I only have 75 cents and a rose costs two dollars." ② She smiled and said, "Came on in with me. I'll buy you a rose for your mother." ③ She placed her order of flowers to her mother and bought a rose for the girl. As they were leaving, she offered the girl a ride. ④ She responded, "Yes, please, if you could. Take me to my mother." The little girl directed her to a grave and placed the rose on it. This changed the woman's plan! ⑤ She returned to the flower shop, canceled the wire order, picked up a bouquet of fresh roses, and drove 100 miles to meet her mother.

20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Mr. Brown wanted his students to learn math in the context of real life. He felt it was not enough for them just to work out problems from a book. To show his students how math could really help ① them, he held several contests during the year. The contests allowed his students ② to have fun while they practiced math and raised money. Once he filled a fishbowl with marbles, asked the students to guess how many marbles there were, and ③ awarded a free lunch to the winner. Another time they entered a contest to guess how many soda cans the back of a pickup truck ④ was held. To win, they had to practice their skills at estimating, multiplying, dividing, and measuring. They used ⑤ most of the prize money for an end-of-the-year field trip.

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
It is hard for street trees to survive with only foot-square holes in the pavement. The average life of a street tree surrounded by concrete and asphalt (A) [is / are] seven to fifteen years. Many factors underground determine if a street tree will make it. If the soil is so dense that the roots cannot get in, it will surely die. If they can get in, there is a better chance of getting the water and nutrients (B) [needing / needed] to survive. Another question is whether adequate water supplies are getting into the growing area. Some of the water comes from underground sources and some from rain, and it is hard to measure (C) [where / what] the tree is getting it. Of course, if the roots get into the sewers, they can get everything they need.
  (A)      (B)        (C)
① is  --- needing --- where
② is  --- needing --- what
③ is  --- needed --- where
④ are --- needing --- where
⑤ are --- needed --- what

22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
If you lead a busy life and are short of time, you may find that you are eating a full meal only about once a day. ① From the standpoint of health this is a bad practice. ② You would be treating your body with more consideration if you had several small meals instead of a single big one. ③ A given amount of food is used more efficiently by the body if it is spaced throughout the day rather than eaten at one sitting. ④ Such symptoms are likely to occur in people who drink more than five cups of strong black coffee in a single day. ⑤ People who have large, infrequent meals tend to gain more weight and to have a higher level of fat in the blood than do those who eat smaller quantities (but the same total) at regular intervals.


[23~27] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
23. 
We push down our feelings because most of us have been brought up to believe that there are feelings which are unacceptable. Some of us learned that all emotions are unacceptable, while others learned that specific emotions such as anger or crying are unacceptable. In fact, there is absolutely nothing wrong with any kind of feeling. When someone tells you not to feel sad or angry, he or she is asking the impossible. You can deny the feelings you are having but you cannot stop them from coming. All that feelings need, in order to pass, is to be acknowledged and accepted. Just saying to yourself, or someone else, 'I feel angry' (or sad, or frightened) is a great start. Let yourself _________ the feelings, good or bad.
① deny	② hide		③ respect
④ choose	⑤ distinguish

24. [3점]
Human beings direct their activities toward the satisfaction of physical wants and general well-being. They avoid, whenever possible, situations that may bring about physical deprivation, including pain, hunger, and a need for sleep. Much contemporary advertising promises these satisfactions, whether from headache remedies, fancy foods, or form-fitting mattresses. An individual can suffer any of these deprivations temporarily, however, and he may knowingly enter into situations which will deprive him for a time if he believes that there will be _________________. The willingness of astronauts to undergo periods of intense training is at least partially explainable in terms of the great rest that they know will come at the end of their missions. 
① creative advertising	② physical contact
③ ultimate satisfaction 	④ emotional imbalance  
⑤ mental illness

25. 
No matter how we shake or tap the bottle of ketchup, some of it refuses to come out. In some cases, up to 20 percent of the product is left in the packaging when it is thrown out. This is not only annoying for consumers but also poses difficulties when recycling: The leftovers first have to be removed from the packaging, which is expensive, time-consuming, and uses a great deal of water. A German project by the Fraunhofer Institutes, together with Munich University of Technology and various industrial partners, will put an end to this dilemma. Researchers are applying thin films, no more than 20 nanometers thick, to the inside surface of packaging in order to __________________. 
① keep ketchup fresh
② remove tap water
③ develop nanotechnology
④ reduce leftover traces 
⑤ increase the price of ketchup

26. 
When we have made an error, as for example in adding up a column of figures, we have a tendency to repeat it again and again. This phenomenon is known as the persistent error. The same thing happens when we try to solve a problem; each time our thoughts take a certain course, that course is more likely to be followed the next time. The reason that we keep making the same error repeatedly is that associations form between the ideas in the chain of thoughts and become firmer each time they are used, until finally the connections are so well established that ___________________. Thus, once we have adopted an unprofitable line of thought, it is harder to adopt a profitable line. 
① the chain is very difficult to break 
② persistent problems are solved automatically
③ the ideas lose their associations with one another 
④ those connections become weaker as time goes by 
⑤ the phenomenon will lead to a profitable line of thought




27. 
About three percent of the weight of sea water is accounted for by salt. The salt content of the ocean is being continually added to by runoff from the land, but it is not increasing. Yet salt cannot leave the sea by evaporation because the water vapor leaves it behind. So for many years it was a mystery as to why the sea should ________________, given the rate of runoff, and particularly if the world was supposed to be hundreds of millions of years old. The riddle was not solved until the 1970s, when the deep ocean openings were discovered. Sea water is swallowed up by these cracks in the ocean bed; when it reemerges, millions of years later, as steam from volcanoes, the salt has been filtered out of it on its passage through the rocks. 
① be so deep and large 
② create so much runoff 
③ have so little salt in it
④ have so many volcanoes
⑤ keep its temperature so steady

28. (A), (B), (C) 의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
A blind spot is not the same as a simple lack of knowledge. A blind spot emerges from a (A) [resistance / connection] to learning in a particular area. At the root of many of our blind spots are a number of emotions or attitudes fear being the most obvious, but also pride, self-satisfaction, and anxiety. A manager, for example, might have unsurpassed knowledge in the financial field, but her understanding of people management might be (B) [flooded / limited]. Her people find her cold and aloof and want her to become more consultative and involved with the team. She, however, is not willing to accept feedback about her management style and refuses to even consider the (C) [prospect / retrospect] of changing her management style. * aloof: 냉담한
     (A)          (B)        (C)
① resistance --- limited --- prospect
② resistance --- flooded --- retrospect
③ resistance --- limited --- retrospect
④ connection --- flooded --- prospect
⑤ connection --- limited --- retrospect

29. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I'의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I start my long journey with great enthusiasm. The thought of conquering the mountain stirs me with anticipation. Although the freezing wind pounds upon me, I feel flushed with warmth. Just after ten o’clock in the morning, I finally put my step on the ice-covered peak of the mountain. A childlike joy spreads through me. I am the two hundred and ninth person to stand on the summit of Mount Everest. My heart races as I take in this glorious moment. The sky is deep blue and cloudless. For fifteen minutes I cherish the view as the highest person on earth. I do not feel the tiredness in my legs, for the journey has been truly worthwhile. 
① irritated and nervous 
② cold and indifferent  
③ anxious and gloomy 
④ excited and satisfied  
⑤ touched and sympathetic

30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?



The figure above shows the equipment for downhill and cross-country skiing and their recommended sizes. As you can see, the downhill ski is ①shorter and wider than the cross-country ski and is about the height of the skier. The cross-country ski meets the ②elbow when the arm is held above the head. In either case, a slightly heavier or more experienced skier might want a longer ski, and a lighter or beginning skier might prefer a shorter ski. The cross-country pole is longer than the one for downhill skiing, and its tip is ③bent. The length of the cross-country pole reaches the armpit. The downhill pole fits comfortably in the hand about two inches ④below the armpit. The bottom of the downhill boot attaches completely to the ski, while the ⑤heel of the cross-country boot is not fastened to the ski. 
*armpit: 겨드랑이

31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Early photography continued the trend toward the imprisonment of the subject and the object of representation. During photography’s first decades, exposure times were quite long. ____(A)____, the daguerreotype process required exposures of four to seven minutes in the sun and from twelve to sixty minutes indoors. Early photographs represented the world as stable, eternal, and unshakable. And when photography ventured to represent living things, they had to be immobilized. ____(B)____, portrait studios universally employed various holding devices to assure the steadiness of the sitter throughout the lengthy time of exposure. The devices firmly held the person in place. In other words, a person who wanted to see his own image became a voluntary prisoner of the machine. 
* daguerreotype: 은판(銀板) 사진술


     (A)            (B)
① For instance --- Instead
② For instance --- Thus
③ Otherwise    --- Thus
④ Otherwise    --- Instead
⑤ Otherwise    --- However

[32~33] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
32. 
Sometimes all a good cheese needs to stop it from going bad is a sympathetic ear. Researchers in France have come up with an ultrasonic sensor that will listen to cheese as it matures and warn cheese makers of defects. Cheese makers have to downgrade up to one-fifth of their produce because of undetected faults. If the new device works well, that problem could be reduced. The technique involves sending a low frequency ultrasonic signal through the cheese to a sensor at the other side. By measuring the change in the speed and size of the emerging signal, the moisture and porosity of the cheese can be mapped. 
*porosity:  물질의 내부에 작은 구멍이 많은 성질
① 치즈 생산량 감소의 원인 탐색 
② 국가별 치즈 생산 방법의 특징 
③ 치즈 숙성에 필요한 시간과 습도 조절 
④ 치즈 영양 분석을 위한 초음파 이용 방법 
⑤ 초음파 감지기를 이용한 치즈의 결함 탐지

33. 
Nobody likes performance reviews. Employees are nervous they will hear nothing but criticism, and bosses are nervous their direct reports will respond defensively. So people generally keep their mouths shut. That is unfortunate because most employees need help figuring out how to improve their performance and advance their careers. Also, it can be harmful to the company if a lack of clear feedback leads to undesirable work behaviors. There is a way to avoid this problem. Managers can help employees learn adaptive techniques like acknowledging negative emotions and reframing fears and criticisms constructively to prevent destructive responses. Once people are comfortable asking for feedback, they will begin to see how they are doing relative to management’s priorities, and their work will be more in line with organizational goals. 
① necessity of a feedback-friendly working environment 
② improvement of working conditions for new employees
③ importance of roles of management in employee placement  
④ development of upper-level management training programs  
⑤ significance of a feedback analysis of the welfare policy

34. 다음 글에서 작곡가에 관한 필자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Composers describe their private world through the use of sound. Making such a description concrete and detailed requires not just inspiration but certain practical tools and skills. No matter what style of music you write, you need to understand dynamics and speed, the uses of harmony and rhythm. You also need to know the range and capabilities of instruments, the possibilities of the human voice, and the problems of acoustics. You need to be able to devise a blueprint that communicates to your musicians what it is you want to hear. A young composer who takes a shortcut in this technical training in his rush to play the role of a composer will dry up very fast. If you learn the proper techniques, then the passion, if it is genuine, will come through. 
① 연주자와 의사소통을 자주 해야 한다. 
② 전문가로부터 작곡법을 배워야 한다. 
③ 예술적 영감을 중요시해야 한다.
④ 악기의 제작 과정을 잘 알아야 한다. 
⑤ 실질적인 음악 지식과 기법을 익혀야 한다.

35. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?[3점]

The above table shows the differences in technology product use on a weekly basis among grade groups of students and teachers in the U.S. ① As the students go up in grade group, the percentage of technology product use also increases. ② The percentage of desktop computer use is the highest, immediately followed by that of video game player use by all three student groups. ③ With respect to cell phones, 39% of the students in the kindergarten to grade 3 group use them, whereas 49% and 75% of the students in the grade 4~6 and 7~12 
groups use them, respectively. ④ For desktop and laptop computer use, the teachers show a higher percentage than all three student groups. ⑤ The teachers have a lower percentage of MP3 player and video game player use than all three student groups. 

36. Costa Rica에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Costa Rica means ‘rich coast’ in Spanish. It was discovered in 1502 and named by Christopher Columbus, who thought it might be a land rich with gold. However, Costa Rica has no great mineral wealth. It has, instead, rich soil and a moderate climate. While other Latin American nations suffered exploitation from outside the region and developed societies split by class conflict between rich and poor, Costa Rica developed an agricultural economy made up of numerous small farmers. There was not great wealth, but what there was was spread evenly. Costa Rica continued its unusual development after it separated from Spain in 1821, becoming the first Latin American country to abolish slavery. In 1889 the little nation held the first free election in Latin America.
① 금을 비롯한 광물자원이 풍부한 나라이다.
② 토양은 비옥하지만 기후는 온화하지 않다.
③ 대규모 농장을 바탕으로 한 농업경제가 발달하였다.
④ 라틴 아메리카에서 노예제도를 폐지한 마지막 국가이다.
⑤ 라틴 아메리카에서 최초로 자유선거를 실시하였다.


37. TLA에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
In the early 1960s, Jill Norris, the mother of two sons with learning difficulties, began to exchange appropriate toys with other families; out of this she founded the Toy Libraries Association (TLA). The association opened toy libraries in community centers, clinics, schools, public libraries, and hospitals around the world. From these toy libraries parents and children could borrow toys knowing that they have been thoroughly tried and tested, not only for their play value but also for safety. Over the years, the association has involved leading professional educators and therapists, alongside parents, in the production of numerous publications on specific toys and aspects of play. In its early years, the association was opposed by the toy industry because it was likely to reduce sales of toys as children were borrowing them. 
① 다른 가족과의 장난감 교환을 계기로 시작 되었다.
② 세계 곳곳의 병원에 장난감 도서관을 세웠다.
③ 장난감 도서관의 장난감은 안정성 시험을 받았다.
④ 출판물 제작에 교육 전문가를 참여시켰다.
⑤ 초기에 장난감 업계로부터 환영을 받았다.




[38~39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. 
Clients send a steady stream of clues and messages through their facial expression, body movement, and voice pitch. Counselors need to learn how to read these messages without distorting or overinterpreting them in order to establish and maintain relationships with their clients. For instance, when Denise says to Jennie, “It seems that it’s hard for you to talk about yourself,” Jennie says, “No, I don’t mind at all.” But the real answer is probably in her nonverbal behavior, for she speaks hesitatingly while looking away and frowning. Reading such clues helps Denise understand Jennie better. Our nonverbal behavior has a way of ‘leaking’ messages about what we really mean. The unplanned nature of nonverbal behavior contributes to this leakage even in the case of highly defensive clients. 
① 상담가는 의뢰인과의 상담 기록을 잘 보관해야 한다.
② 상담가는 의뢰인의 대인 관계에 주의를 기울여야 한다.
③ 상담가는 의뢰인의 개인 정보를 유출하지 않아야 한다.
④ 상담가는 의뢰인의 비언어적 표현을 바르게 파악해야한다.
⑤ 상담가는 의뢰인과의 신뢰 형성을 기본 원칙으로 해야 한다.

39. 
Sweeping statements have been made about the effect of clothing on the behavior of a child. It has been said that a child who is better dressed is better behaved, and that a child who is dressed like a cowboy is louder than he is when dressed in ordinary clothes. Clothing, however, might have a temporary effect on the behavior of the child, but not a lasting effect. That is, we would predict that a child who was dressed in his best clothes and whose mother stressed that they were ‘best’ would be better behaved for a short period, but by the end of the hour the child would have forgotten his clothes and would be acting as he would in old clothes. Likewise, the child who is dressed in a cowboy outfit might be very noisy while playing cowboys for a brief time, but he might soon change to another activity and be no more noisy than usual. 
① 아이들은 활동하기에 적합한 옷을 선호한다.
② 어려서부터 단정한 복장을 습관화해야 한다.
③ 화려한 의상은 아이들의 행동을 제약한다.
④ 엄마의 취향이 자녀들의 옷 선택에 영향을 준다.
⑤ 옷이 아이들의 행동에 미치는 영향은 일시적이다.

40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

Due to this trade, the plant variety became widespread in a region. 

For thousands of years, farmers at harvest time have selected seeds, cuttings, or tubers from superior plants to save for the next planting. (①) Farmers often protected the stored seeds from insects or animals by sealing them in clay pots or burying them in baskets covered with ash. (②) They also often stored tubers in cold areas and either replanted cuttings immediately or kept them dry until the next planting time. (③) Farmers thus saved their genetic stocks from season to season. (④) They could exchange remaining stocks with neighbors or exchange them in the local market. (⑤) Organized seed production, however, did not begin until the early 1900s. 
* tuber: (감자 등의) 덩이줄기

[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. 



A study found that enrollment in physical education classes was not related to academic achievement scores, but involvement in vigorous physical activity was. Students who engaged in vigorous activity outside of school at least 20 minutes per day, three days per week, were found to have higher academic scores. Students in the physical education class spent an average of only 19 minutes out of a 55-minute class engaged in moderate-to-vigorous physical activity. Given that this amount and intensity of activity in physical education classes had no correlation to students’ academic achievement, whereas there was a significant association between academic achievement and vigorous activity outside of school, the researchers propose that there may be a certain minimum level of activity necessary to produce the potentially desirable effects. 
*enrollment: 등록
① Intense Physical Activity: Healthy or Not? 
② Physical Activity Levels and Academic Achievement
③ Academic Achievement and Amount of Study lime 
④ How to Increase Enrollment in Physical Education  
⑤ Student Health and In-class Physical Education

42. 
The tragic heroes in Shakespeare’s plays have free will. They possess their own defects of character that bring their downfalls. Macbeth is ambitious but weak; Othello is jealous; Hamlet cannot make up his mind but all three might have made themselves into better human beings. Nothing outside themselves prevents them from taking the right path as opposed to the wrong, or tragic, path. On the other hand, for the heroes in Greek tragedies where fate embodied in the oracles prevails, there is no free will. The gods control a man’s destiny, and one cannot fight the gods. Regardless of their strength or wisdom, the heroes cannot control their own future. That is why the heroes in Greek tragedies can be compared to fish in the net.  *oracle: 신탁(神託)
① Types of Heroes in Shakespearean Tragedies 
② Lack of Moral Messages in Western Tragedies
③ Influence of Greek Tragedies on Shakespearean Plays 
④ Conflict Between Gods and Heroes in Greek Tragedies  
⑤ Difference Between Shakespearean and Greek Tragic Heroes


43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

When we look at the world and ourselves, we do it through a set of filters. Think about what a filter is. A filter is a mechanism that lets some things flow in but screens other things out. 

(A) Through them, we process and assign a weight and meaning to every event in our lives. Some things flow in, others are screened out, but everything is affected: not just what we ‘see,’ but what we ‘hear’ and ‘believe.’ 
(B) Depending on what the filter is made up of, it can also alter whatever is looked at or passes through it. Sunglasses are a good example of a visual filter. 
(C) But, obviously, I am not talking here about some physical apparatus that we can put on and take off, like a pair of glasses. In fact, the filters I am mentioning are internal, mental, emotional, verbal, and perceptual in nature. 
① (A)-(B)-(C)	② (A)-(C)-(B) ③ (B)-(A)-(C)
④ (B)-(C)-(A)  	⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)

44. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The descriptions of sound production have been rewritten in this edition so as to update the theory on which they were based and to provide better practical advice regarding pronunciation problems. Several figures have been redrawn in order to achieve greater accuracy and clearer detail. The authors have tried to eliminate traces of gender-biased attitudes wherever they were detected, and a definite attempt has been made to balance female and male references. The most significant kind of change in the new edition, however, is the result of the effort we have made to introduce more use of language for real communicative purposes in the learning activities suggested for students to carry out. 
① 개정판의 주요 변화를 설명하려고 
② 새로운 언어 학습법을 제시하려고
③ 새 책의 출판 일정을 안내하려고 
④ 새로운 편집 규정을 통보하려고
⑤ 최근의 발음 이론을 소개하려고

45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The introduction of the player piano in the United States at the turn of the 20th century had been accompanied by fairly critical comments. Player pianos produced music mechanically through a set of instructions stored on a music roll. Although proponents of the player piano such as piano manufacturers and publishers of sheet music thought that it would lead to ‘an almost universal music education,’ many music teachers, musicians, and composers opposed it. Opponents claimed that one could copy sound, but not interpretation, and that mechanical instruments reduced the expression of music to mathematical systems. For this reason, they believed that mechanized music lessened the ideal of beauty by ‘producing the same after same, with no soul, no joy, no passion,’ and that the introduction of the player piano would lead to the disappearance of amateur players. 
* proponent: 옹호자

While some believed that the player piano would provide a universal music education, others criticized its ____(A)____ music from a(n) ____(B)____ viewpoint. 

	(A)		(B)
① recorded 	---	economical
② repetitive 	---	commercial
③ harmonious 	---	conservative
④ mechanized	---	artistic
⑤ artificial 	---	political

[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A) 
Several years ago, we were asked to help with the merger of two community volunteer groups, who wanted to join together in order to establish an agency that would have more influence and better financing than the two separate agencies of the past. Both were rural groups, which had traditionally and geographically been separated by a range of mountains. 
(B) 
In leading the planning meetings of the two boards, he carefully kept the groups focused on the long-range issues, and convinced them not to look at the headquarters question until the very end of the process. Once the organizational structure was set, by-laws agreed upon, and all the volunteers had actually merged, then the headquarters site was decided on logically and easily, as it turned out. 
(C) 
We worked with the two groups to help them set goals, develop policy, and build an organizational structure. Meanwhile, the young executive director, who saw a successful merger as his primary responsibility, was especially careful about one thing. On either side of the mountain was a large town. Each of the former agencies had its own board, a separate staff, and long-standing regional ties. The executive director understood that the question of where the new joint agency’s headquarters would be was an important question as well as a potentially explosive one. 
(D) 
By then everyone was so committed to the organization and its goals that the headquarters question had become a relatively unimportant, routine one. The executive director of the merging agencies was primarily concerned about the long-range good of the organization and the total community. He used all his influence and persuasive powers to make that a common focus, and the results were successful. 

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(C)-(D) 	② (B)-(D)-(C) 	③ (C)-(B)-(D) 
④ (D)-(B)-(C)  	⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)

47. 위 글(C)의 밑줄 친 one thing이 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 경제적인 지원	② 본부 위치의 결정 
③ 이사회의 회직 제정 	④ 산간 지역의 개발 
⑤ 직원들의 책임감 고취

48. 위 글이 시사하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 기업의 성장은 지역사회 발전에 도움을 준다.
② 조직의 화합을 위해 동호회를 활성화해야 한다.
③ 장기적인 관점에서 본질적 문제 해결에 집중해야 한다.
④ 의사 결정을 할 때 소수의 의견을 존중해야 한다.
⑤ 개인의 잠재력을 계발에는 인내가 필요하다.



[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
   It was spring and some 6th grade boys at a suburban elementary school were fooling around on the playground. They had discovered a great new trick. One of them would kneel down behind someone and the other would push the person over. The trick worked perfectly with (a) Anna. She fell over with ease. She was hurt and crying. In the process (b) she had broken her wrist. The yard duty staff sent the shaken boys to the principal. 
   The principal began by saying that she understood that they were playing and had not meant to cause serious harm, but that, in fact, they had. She explained that the girl would have to wear a cast for weeks and now lots of ordinary things would be more difficult for (c) her. She pointed out that the girl played the flute and would now not be able to play in the spring concert. By the time (d) she finished, the boys were in tears and very sorry for what they had done. The principal also suspended the boys for a day, explaining to them that even though she knew they were sorry and had not meant to cause such harm, she believed suspension was necessary to signal to everyone in the community the seriousness of the situation. On their own, the boys brought (e) the girl flowers and apologized for hurting her. 
* suspend: 정학시키다

49. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Taking Responsibility for Your Actions
② Respecting Students' Privacy
③ Importance of Self-respect
④ Roles of Family in Childhood
⑤ Negative Consequences of Suspension

1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 손전등을 고르시오. 


2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① upset       	② jealous	③ relieved  
④ satisfied	⑤ apologetic

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오.
① 생물학	② 천문학	③ 지리학
④ 물리학	⑤ 기상학

4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 프로젝터 빌려 오기   
② 회의장 예약하기
③ 회의용 자료 복사하기     
④ 회의용 다과 준비하기 
⑤ 프론트 데스크에 전화하기

5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불해야 할 금액을 고르시오. 
① $60        	② $65         	③ $80
④ $100      	⑤ $105

6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 특별 할인 행사를 홍보하려고
② 예약제 시행을 공지하려고
③ 가격 인상을 알리려고
④ 염색용 물품을 광고하려고
⑤ 최신 헤어스타일을 소개하려고

7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 행사 포스터 만들기
② 행사 날짜 정하기
③ 회원 가입 권유하기
④ 행사용 과자 굽기
⑤ 회원 주소록 만들기

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 학생 — 보건 교사
② 비평가 — 영화 감독
③ 성우 — 녹음 담당자
④ 연극배우 — 무대 담당자
⑤ 모델 — 사진 편집 기사

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
① 창고 	② 등대		③ 응접실
④ 조선소	⑤ 양식장

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 음료수 가져오기
② 유니폼 준비하기
③ 축구공 빌려오기
④ 구급 상자 사오기
⑤ 피자 주문하기

11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 물고기를 고르시오. [3점]


12. 멀티미디어실에 관한 안내 방송을 듣고, 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 9월 15일에 학생들에게 개방한다.
② 주중 오전 8시부터 밤 9시까지 운영한다.
③ 대형 TV와 개인용 시청 부스가 있다.
④ 자료 대여 기간은 최장 열흘이다.
⑤ 복사나 출력을 할 때는 현금을 내야 한다.

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
     
①       ②       ③       ④       ⑤

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: _________________________________
① Good job. The photograph of the waterfall came out nice. 
② I’m sorry. I didn’t know I wasn’t allowed to do that. 
③ Too bad. Let’s never come to this park again. 
④ That’s a great idea. Let me get the camera out.
⑤ I agree. These flowers are not worth taking a picture of.

15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman: _________________________________
① I should have brought my sandals. 
② I don’t want to lose my racket. 
③ I didn’t want to play anyway. 
④ I have to change my clothes. 
⑤ I’ll be back really quickly.

16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: _________________________________
① Just remember not to fall down on the ground. 
② Now I know why you didn’t follow my advice.
③ I appreciate your explanation of the concept to me. 
④ I don’t understand why your science book is wrong. 
⑤ Science isn’t hard if you understand the basic concepts.

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Amy가 Steve에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Amy: _________________________________
① Great! This plant is very expensive.
② Don’t worry. I’m just glad you’re not hurt. 
③ This is terrible! I’m so disappointed in you. 
④ Watch out! No more allowance for you. 
⑤ Cheer up. I’m glad you replanted it.



18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
This is used in product manufacturing. This is designed by determining the sequences of operations for the manufacturing of each product component as well as the final product. Work assignments, the number of machines, and production rates are coordinated so that all operations performed along this work successfully together. All movement of product parts on this is simplified, with no crossing over, backtracking, or repetition. This is increasingly being handled by computers, which monitor information and adjust the flow of parts accordingly. This usually consists of conveyor belts on which workers perform specific functions. Nowadays, automatic machinery and industrial robots are taking the place of human workers on this.
① 조립 라인		② 가내 수공업
③ 보안 시스템		④ 교통 안내 체계
⑤ 화재 경보 장치



19. 밑줄 친 he[He]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
For a year Danny had trained hard to master the famous Pikes Peak Marathon. But when running the actual marathon, he was feeling weary and tired. In a narrow path through the woods, ① he got stuck behind a slow, weak runner wearing a T-shirt with ‘Bob’s #4’ written on the back. ② He felt even more tired because he had to lag behind the fellow. As he was finally overtaking the runner, out of curiosity, ③ he asked him, “What’s Bob’s #4?” “My friend Bob had a dream to run this marathon four times,” he answered. ④ He ran it three times, but then last year he died. So I decided to complete his dream for him. This is Bob’s #4.” Suddenly, all the exhaustion ⑤ he had been feeling during the race disappeared.

20. 다음 글의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
We are addicted to our cars. We do not think twice before driving to pick something up at a store that is only three blocks away. In fact, we romanticize driving with our thoughts of long Sunday drives and adventurous cross-country road trips. Well, we need to get rid of this addiction — and fast — because driving is harmful to our health and to our planet’s health. The air pollutants that spit out from the car exhaust pipes have been proven to cause cancer, and the carbon dioxide that is emitted causes global warming. One of the easiest ways to reduce these emissions is simply to change our mind-set about driving. We need to make driving our last choice of transportation to live a happy, healthy life. And the first step in achieving this new mind-set is to reorganize our lives so we do not need to drive much or far.
① 가능하면 자동차 사용을 줄이자.
② 친환경 자동차 개발을 서두르자.
③ 타인을 배려하는 운전습관을 기르자.
④ 교통 법규를 준수하여 사고를 최소화하자.
⑤ 자동차를 이용한 여행 문화를 활성화시키자.

21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
No matter what we are shopping for, it is not primarily a brand we are choosing, but a culture, or rather the  people associated with that culture. (A) [Whatever / Whether] you wear torn jeans or like to recite poetry, by doing so you make a statement of belonging to a group of people. Who we believe we are (B) [is / are] a result of the choices we make about who we want to be like, and we subsequently demonstrate this desired likeness to others in various and often subtle ways. Artificial as this process is, this is what becomes our ‘identity,’ an identity (C) [grounded / grounding] on all the superficial differences we distinguish between ourselves and others. This, after all, is what we are shopping for: self-identity, knowledge of who we are.
     (A)        (B)      (C)
① Whatever…… is……  grounded
② Whatever…… are…… grounding
③ Whether……  is……  grounded
④ Whether……  are…… grounding
⑤ Whether……  are…… grounded

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Almost every day I play a game with myself ① that I call ‘time machine.’ I made it up in response to my erroneous belief that what I was all worked up about was really important. ② To play ‘time machine’ all you have to do is to imagine that whatever circumstance you are dealing with is not happening right now but a year from now. It might be an argument with your spouse, a mistake, or a lost opportunity, but it is highly ③ likely that a year from now you are not going to care. It will be one more irrelevant detail in your life. While this simple game will not solve ④ every your problems, it can give you an enormous amount of needed perspective. I find myself laughing at things that I used to ⑤ take far too seriously.

23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
There are some areas of mathematics where long, unpleasant but basically routine calculations have to be done, and there are some good computer programs for doing them. ➊ Thus, computers can be very useful time-saving devices, sometimes so much so that they enable mathematicians to discover results that they could not have discovered on their own. ➋ Nevertheless, the kind of help that computers can provide is very limited. ➌ One point that deserves to be made is that the lack of women in mathematics is another statistical phenomenon. ➍ If it happens that your problem, or more usually sub-problem, is one of the small minority that can be solved by a long and repetitive search, then well and good. ➎ If, on the other hand, you are stuck and need a bright idea, then, in the present state of technology, a computer will be no help whatsoever.

【24~28】다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. 
Furniture is among the oldest engineering structures designed to carry a rather well-defined load under rather well-defined circumstances. We are not surprised that furniture used beyond its intended purpose is broken, and we readily blame the child who abuses the furniture rather than the designer of the furniture or the furniture itself when it is abused. Thus a chair must support a person in a sitting position, but it might not be expected to survive a fall from a tall building. A child’s bed might be expected to support a sleeping child, but it would not necessarily be considered badly designed if it collapsed under the child’s wild use of it as a trampoline. The arms and legs of chairs, the heads and feet of beds, just like those of the people whom they serve, cannot be expected to be __________ without limit.      *trampoline: (도약용) 놀이 기구
① comfortable 	② expensive 	③ beautiful
④ strong 	⑤ heavy

25. 
A vendor in a city set up shop and sold doughnuts and coffee to passersby. During the breakfast and lunch hours, he always had long lines of customers waiting. He noticed that, as he was a one-man show, the biggest bottleneck preventing him from selling more doughnuts and coffee was the disproportionate amount of time it took to make change for his customers. Finally, he simply put a small basket on the side of his stand filled with dollar bills and coins. Most customers responded by being completely honest, often leaving him larger-than-normal tips. Also, he was able to move customers through at twice the pace because he did not have to make change. In addition, he found that his customers liked this idea and kept coming back. By ____________ in this way, he was able to double his sales.
① refusing change 	② extending trust
③ using a new recipe 	④ distributing samples
⑤ making tips obligatory

26. 
Few things hold people back more than ____________. They do not ask for what they need because the answer may be no. They do not ask their boss for a raise or for more time off. They are afraid to be the first to say, “I love you.” They do not ask for help from people they do not know well. In short, they do not let their wants and needs be known because they are afraid of being turned away. But the wonderful truth is this: If you can accept NO for an answer, you can fearlessly ask for whatever you need. It is also true that you will not receive if you do not ask. So do not be afraid to ask! You may be surprised at the number of people willing to help. 
① the fear of rejection 	
② the loss of patience 
③ the shortage of time 	
④ the lack of knowledge 
⑤ the excess of curiosity

27.  
Take a moment to cast your mind back over the past week or so, and think about something you regret. Was it something you did or something you failed to do? It seems that ____________. As an example, consider Mary and Laura, who invest their money in companies A and B. Mary invests in company A and considers switching to company B but she decides not to. Laura invests in company B and considers switching to company A and she decides to do so. They both find out that they would have been better off by $1,000 if they had taken different actions. Who do you think feels more regret? Most people judge that Laura will regret her action more than Mary will regret her inaction. 
① unplanned actions always give rise to regrets 
② people regret their actions more than their failures to act 
③ people regret most when their relationship with others suffers 
④ people feel satisfied when they make their own decisions 
⑤ regret makes people take more profitable actions

28. [3점]
The spread of prosperity, the single-family home, the invention of television and computers have all made it possible for us to live private lives unimaginable to previous generations. We no longer live in close quarters with our neighbors, we can move about without crowding into buses or trains; we do not have to go to theaters or share our tastes with our neighbors. However, the same technologies that help separate us from the crowds also make it possible to monitor and record our behaviors. Although fewer people have intimate knowledge of our lives, many people — mostly unknown to us — know something about us. The very technology that was supposed to free us from mass society has turned out to be as much a fishbowl as an information highway. In modern society, we have discovered that ____________.
① people cannot use public transportation because of crowding
② technology makes us independent from natural environments
③ more people become indifferent to the spread of prosperity
④ cooperating with people leads to wrong conclusions
⑤ being free often means also being naked

29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
  Efficiency means producing a specific end rapidly, with the (A) [least / most] amount of cost. The idea of efficiency is specific to the interests of the industry or business, but is typically advertised as a (B) [loss / benefit] to the customer. Examples are plentiful: the salad bars, filling your own cup, self-service gasoline, ATMs, microwave dinners and convenience stores which are different from the old-time groceries where you gave your order to the grocer. The interesting element here is that the customer often ends up doing the work that previously was done for them. And the customer ends up (C) [saving / spending] more time and being forced to learn new technologies, remember more numbers, and often pay higher prices in order for the business to operate more efficiently, or maintain a higher profit margin.

    (A)         (B)          (C)
① least  ……	loss 	…… saving
② least  ……	loss 	…… spending
③ least  ……	benefit 	…… spending
④ most  ……	loss 	…… saving
⑤ most  ……	benefit 	…… spending

30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
  
The three pictures above represent a model of the effects of global warming on permafrost regions. Permafrost is frozen ground that remains at or below 0℃ for more than two years. Most of the world’s permafrost has been frozen for millennia, trapping massive amounts of carbon in organic material. In areas of extreme cold presented in Picture 1, permafrost is thousands of feet thick and lies ① below a layer of soil a few feet deep called the active layer, which freezes and thaws with the seasons. Where the average annual air temperature is slightly below freezing, permafrost is ② scattered as in Picture 2. Compared to Picture 1, the permafrost in Picture 2 is topped by a ③ shallower active layer. In Picture 3, in permafrost regions that now experience shorter, milder winters, the area of permafrost is ④ reduced further, compared to Picture 2. Carbon dioxide and methane are freed into the atmosphere and ⑤ more trees and plants grow as in Picture 3.     *thaw: 녹다




31. 다음 글에 드러난 'I'의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것은?
My mother gave me some strawberry jam to take to Mrs. Sampson. It was winter and, when she opened the door, I was overcome by the smell of the stove and the damp, dark atmosphere. I was afraid of Mrs. Sampson. She was a big woman with gray skin, like clay, with a couple of gray hairs sticking out of her chin. She always wore a dirty, mud-colored cardigan over shapeless dresses. Worst of all, she had bad breath! “Here you are, dear,” she said in her scratchy voice, and put a dollar bill in my hand, “but don’t spend it all at once!” I fled, back to the relative safety of my own home.
① calm 	② scared 	③ angry
④ cheerful 	⑤ indifferent

32. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
American culture in general appears suspicious of leisure. Some people believe this may be due to the Protestant work ethic. Many Americans fill their free time with intellectually or physically demanding hobbies or volunteer work. Even on vacation, Americans stay in touch with the workplace via their cellular phones and laptop computers. ＿＿(A)＿＿, Europeans hold leisure in high regard. A new French law gave France the shortest work week in Europe. Companies with more than twenty employees are required to cut work hours from 39 to 35 per week. Besides creating more leisure time for workers, this move is expected to help ease unemployment. In Germany, ＿＿(B)＿＿, longer work weeks may soon be the standard. Its low birth rate has resulted in fewer workers supporting more and more retired Germans in the generous state welfare system.
      (A)                      (B)
① On the other hand 	…… therefore
② On the other hand 	…… however
③ Likewise 		…… indeed
④ Likewise 		…… however
⑤ Nevertheless 	…… therefore

【33~34】다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. 
Growing native plants in a garden is catching on like wildfire. Natives often attract more birds and pollinators such as bees and butterflies, increasing their diversity to your garden. Imitating a native landscape in an isolated urban yard, however, does not do all that much to make up for lost native habitat. So what is the most ecological use of your garden? At the top of the list is gardening for your own food. There is no reason that what you plant for birds, butterflies, and bees cannot also feed you and your family. Sunflowers are often called ‘nature’s bird feeders,’ but you can plant enough to share the oil-rich seeds. Many fruit trees in your garden can also feed both birds and you.
*pollinator: 꽃가루받이를 하는 곤충
① uses of native plants in the wild as food suppliers 
② necessities of preserving the native landscapes 
③ increasing diversity of wild plants in a garden
④ growing food plants in a garden for humans and animals 
⑤ ecological distinction between birds and pollinators

34. 다음 글에서 필자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Conditioning occurs indirectly, which adds to its impact on us. Let’s say, for example, that you watch another person get an electric shock. Each time, a signal light comes on before the shock is delivered. Even if you do not receive a shock yourself, you will soon develop an emotional response to the light. Children who learn to fear thunder by watching their parents react to it have undergone similar conditioning. If horror movies can affect us, we might expect the emotions of parents, friends, and relatives to have even more impact. How, for instance, does a city child learn to fear snakes and respond emotionally to mere pictures of them? Being told that “snakes are dangerous” may not explain the child’s emotional response. More likely, the child has observed others reacting fearfully to the word snake or to snake images on television.
① 언어가 감정 형성에 미치는 영향
② 성장 환경과 지적 발달의 상관 관계
③ 타인의 반응을 통한 조건화의 형성
④ 직접 경험을 통한 아동의 감정 변화
⑤ 도시와 시골 아동의 조건화 과정 차이

35. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Travel around the country with Carl Sandburg, a twentieth-century poet who has been called the voice of America. Hop aboard his poetry train on which each amazing poem leads to a different destination —some quiet and peaceful, others alive with enthusiasm and humor. Visit rural back roads and busy cities, and meet friendly animals and ordinary people going about their daily lives. More than thirty wonderful poems are presented in this collection of his poetry, along with special illustrations that capture the spirit of the poetry. With a magic touch, Sandburg manages to find the laughter and meaning in everyday things — doors, rain, colors, the sea, a telephone wire, words, and even a rat! So pack your imagination and get ready to take a special trip with the words of Carl Sandburg.
① 창작시 공모를 광고하려고
② 여행의 중요성을 강조하려고
③ 기행문 쓰는 방법을 설명하려고
④ 시집을 소개하여 읽기를 권하려고
⑤ 미국의 다양한 작가들을 소개하려고





36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
  The above diagram shows the average retention rate of learning after 24 hours for various instructional methods which are categorized into different processing types. ① The percentage of average retention increases from the top to the bottom of the pyramid. ② At the top of the pyramid is Lecture which results in an average retention of 5%, followed by Reading that yields 10% average retention. ③ Regarding the Verbal and Visual Processing type, the average percentage of retention increases from Audiovisual to Demonstration to Discussion Group. ④ The instructional methods, Practice by Doing and Teach Others / Immediate Use of Learning, belonging to the processing type of Doing, result in 75% and 90% average retention, respectively. ⑤ The average retention rate of Teach Others / Immediate Use of Learning is four times that of Demonstration.    *retention: 기억 보유력


37. The barrier at the River Scheldt에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The barrier at the River Scheldt in the Netherlands is the world’s largest tidal surge barrier. It protects Zeeland from the constant threat of flooding. Completed in 1987, it forms part of the Delta Project, a line of massive sea-defenses, which was constructed after disastrous floods in 1953. As originally planned, the barrier was to be a solid dam that, by drastically restricting tidal flows, would have destroyed much of the marine environment on the Eastern Scheldt. In 1973, however, a campaign forced the project to be suspended. The project was revived four years later in a new and greatly modified form. Instead of being permanently sealed, the redesigned barrier is now normally open to the tides, restricting their flow by only 25 percent. It is only when water levels reach 3 meters above normal that steel gates close shut, holding back even the most extreme waters.   *surge: 범람
① 1953년에 일어난 홍수 피해를 줄이는 데 도움이 되었다.
② 조수의 흐름을 완전히 막아 해양 생태계에 큰 피해를 야기했다.
③ 건설 사업이 중단된 지 5년 후 재개되었다.
④ 재설계되어 평상시에는 조수의 흐름을 절반만 제한한다.
⑤ 물이 특정 수위에 이를 때 수문이 닫힌다.


38. precocial birds에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The young of precocial birds belonging to the same clutch have a strong incentive to hatch as close together in time as possible. The mother and the first-hatched young will be on the move within hours; chicks left behind in the eggs will die. When the eggs of these species are incubated separately, the hatching times are spread over a period of days; but when they are kept together, hatching times are close by, within one or two hours. This coordinated hatching is achieved by sound signals exchanged by the chicks while they are still in the eggs. The most characteristic sound is a regular loud click, which is most persistent just prior to hatching. It is not caused by a tapping against the shell, but is a vocalization associated with breathing movements.
*precocial: 부화 후 곧 활동하는
**clutch 한배의 새끼들
① 한 배의 새끼들은 가능한 한 서로 가까운 시간에 부화하려는 강한 동기가 있다.
② 어미와 먼저 부화한 새끼들은 수 시간 내에 이동한다.
③ 알들이 서로 멀어져 부화할 때, 부화는 며칠에 걸쳐 일어난다.
④ 새끼들은 알 속에서 소리 신호들을 주고 받는다.
⑤ 가장 특징적인 소리는 껍데기를 두드려 내는 것이다.



【39~40】다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. 
We know where we are headed and what we want to do. However, quite often, due to forces outside our control, things do not go as we had planned and we have to adjust to a postponement or create a whole new set of circumstances. This is what happens when life throws us a curveball. The fact is that life is unpredictable. For example, your car breaks down and you are late for an appointment. While it is true that you never arrive at that important meeting, you end up spending a few relaxing hours with people you would never have met otherwise. Remember that not only are curveballs the universe’s way of keeping us awake —which is a gift in and of itself — but they are also its method of bringing us wonderful surprises.
① 스포츠는 때때로 삶에 활력을 가져다준다.
② 삶에서의 절제는 자신의 의지에 달려 있다.
③ 삶의 예측 불가능성은 긍정적으로 작용할 수 있다.
④ 현실에 안주하는 것은 실패의 원인이 될 수 있다.
⑤ 계획한 대로 삶을 살아가려는 노력이 필요하다.



40. 
When my son was seven years old, we went to a dolphin show. After the show, I went up to the trainer and asked, “How did you get the dolphin to do all these really neat things?” The trainer looked at my son and me and said, “Unlike many parents, whenever the dolphin does anything like what I want him to do, I notice him! I give him a hug and a fish.” The light went on in my head. Whenever my son did what I wanted him to do, I paid little attention to him. However, when he did not, I gave him a lot of attention because I did not want to raise a bad kid! I was unintentionally teaching him to be a little monster in order to get my attention. Since that day, I have tried hard to notice my son’s good acts and downplay his mistakes.
① 아이는 부모의 행동을 관찰하여 모방하려고 한다.
② 아이의 잘못보다 바른 행동에 더 관심을 기울여야 한다.
③ 아이와 함께 하는 시간이 많을수록 긍정적인 영향을 준다.
④ 아이가 동물의 행동을 관찰하는 것은 교육적 효과가 있다.
⑤ 잘못된 행동을 하는 아이는 지속적인 관찰이 필요하다.

41. 주어진 글에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

A man was diagnosed with a terminal illness and given six months to live. In his last few days, he said that he had done more in the past months than in his entire life. Remember that life has a deadline; we just do not know when it is. So let’s get one!

(A) This decreasing number is a constant reminder to motivate you to take action to live your life, today. You trade each day of your life for what you do in that day. Make a good trade!
(B) What you have is the number of days that you have left to live. Write this number down, and every morning cross it out and write the new number, which is one day less.
(C) We are going to do some calculations to find out how much longer you have to live. Start with the number 79, the average life expectancy. Now, subtract your current age. Multiply that number by 365.
① (A) - (B) - (C)	② (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (A) - (C)   	④ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


【42~43】다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
42. 
The person who wrote of a building bringing gladness to the viewer reminds us of the importance of beauty in human life. Biologists account for the human desire for art in other terms. They explain that human beings have very large brains that demand stimulation. Curious, active, and inventive, we humans constantly explore, and in so doing invent things that appeal to our senses — fine arts, fine food, fine scents, and fine music. Art has mostly been considered in terms of seeking beauty, but there are other reasons deeply rooted in the human experience that create needs for art. For one, humans also reflect on the nature of things and the meaning of life. Visually and verbally, we constantly communicate with each other; in our need to understand and our need to communicate, the arts serve a vital function.
① Verbal vs. Non-verbal Communication 
② Societal Roles of Inventions
③ Why Do Humans Need Art?
④ Visual Stimulation to Human Brains
⑤ What Is the Best Way to Enjoy Fine Food?




43. 
It is possible to observe a basic and sometimes unexplainable division in the animal world. Some species crowd together and require physical contact with each other. Others avoid touching. No apparent logic governs the category into which a species falls. Curiously enough, closely related animals may belong to different categories. The great Emperor penguin is a contact species. It conserves heat through contact with its fellows in large groups. The smaller Adelie penguin is a non-contact species. Thus it is somewhat less adaptable to cold than the Emperor. Other functions served by contact behavior are unknown. One could guess that, since contact animals are more ‘involved’ with each other, their social organization and possibly their manner of exploiting the environment might be different from those of non-contact animals.
① Dangers Caused by Cold to Some Animal Species 
② Conflicts Between Contact and Non-contact Species
③ Relationship Between Temperature and Animal Survival 
④ Reproduction Patterns of Different Animal Species 
⑤ Categorization of Animals by Their Contact Behaviors


44. 글의 흐름으로 보아 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

But the strong pig can race to the dispenser and push the weak pig aside to claim the leftovers.

Consider the following experiment with a strong and a weak pig. Two pigs are kept in a box with a lever at one end and a food dispenser at the other. When the lever is pushed, food appears at the dispenser. ( ① ) If the weak pig pushes the lever, the strong pig waits by the dispenser and eats all the food. ( ② ) Even if the weak pig races to the dispenser before the food is gone, the strong pig pushes the weak pig away. ( ③ ) The weak pig realizes this, so it never pushes the lever first. ( ④ ) On the other hand, if the strong pig pushes the lever, the weak pig waits by the dispenser and eats most of the food. ( ⑤ ) This makes it worthwhile for the strong pig to push the lever. The outcome is that the strong pig does all the work and the weak pig does most of the eating.  *dispenser: 일정량을 배분해 주는 장치

45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
 The face of the water, in time, became a wonderful book — a book that was a dead language to the uneducated passenger, but which told its mind to the pilot without reserve, delivering its most cherished secrets as clearly as if it spoke them with a voice. The passenger who could not read this book saw nothing but all manner of pretty pictures in it, painted by the sun and shaded by the clouds. To the pilot, however, it was a highlighted passage. Indeed, it was more than that; for it meant that a wreck or a rock was buried there that could tear the life out of the strongest vessel that ever floated. It is the faintest and simplest expression the water ever makes, and the most frightening to a pilot’s eye.     *pilot: 수로 안내인   

▶ To the passenger, the face of the water reflects ＿＿(A)＿＿ whereas to the pilot it reveals ＿＿(B)＿＿.

    (A)               (B)
① beauty 	…… pleasure
② beauty 	…… danger
③ anxiety 	…… pleasure
④ anxiety 	…… danger
⑤ fright 	…… pleasure


【46~47】다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
  As we explore together the virtual world that floats on the edge of this material life, the many imaginative territories you inhabit bring back another reality. I catch images of my own childhood wanderings through Narnia, the land of hobbits, and Mowgli’s jungle. All these are deep pleasures which combine all my senses and momentarily transport me into another dimension of living.
  If I were to bring it all together I would say that among all the misery, fear, injustice, and pain, I hope you will not forget moments when all this fades away into periods of innocent joy. It is when we bring all our powerful senses together, perhaps in a moment in the garden of earthly delights that we ＿＿＿＿＿ over despair.
  So the moment when you dance to Handel or when you sit in a pool of wild flowers, or gravely take part in your first tea ceremony, these are the moments you will treasure. They are, with similar moments with friends and loved ones, what makes being human bearable.       *hobbit: Tolkien 작품에 나오는 등장인물

46. 밑줄 친 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① deliberate 	② triumph 	③ watch
④ argue 	⑤ grieve

47. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?	
① Negative Aspects of Innocent Joy
② Unpleasant Places Visited in Childhood
③ Gaining Strength from Pleasurable Memories
④ Overlooking Injustices in a Fantasy World
⑤ Playing Games in Virtual Reality








【48~50】다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
  When I first began teaching, I was invited to a workshop for new professors. Like most people who teach at universities, I had spent a long time learning what to teach, but none learning how to teach it. Somehow, my university seemed to hope, a weekend spent with experienced professors would make up for that. My colleagues presented well-crafted lectures about the tools they used in the classroom. I enjoyed their presentations, but do not remember a thing they said.
(B)
  When we were called to the next talk, he put down his cup and I noticed there was not a trace of coffee in it. I thought that was rather odd, and said so. “My doctor told me to stop drinking coffee,” he explained. “So I have always used an empty cup. Doesn’t make any difference.” I decided to try his idea in my class, but not with an empty cup.
(C)
  I took a cup of coffee with me to my next class Monday morning. It helped. My pauses, as I drank the coffee, not only gave my students time to think about what I had said, but gave me time to think about what I was going to say next. I began to use my pauses to look around the room to see how my students were reacting to what I had just said. When I saw their attention wander, I tried to bring them back. When I saw them puzzled over some concept that I thought I had explained, I gave another example. My lectures became less organized and less brilliant, but my students seemed to understand me better.
(D)
  One thing that I do remember happened at a coffee break. Finding myself alone, I turned to a mathematics professor standing nearby. I asked him what his favorite teaching tool was. “A cup of coffee,” he said. I asked him how he used it. “Well,” he said, “I talk too much and too fast in the classroom. Students sometimes have trouble following me. So every once in a while, when I’ve said something I want my students to think about, I stop and take a sip of coffee. It lets what I’ve just said sink in.”


48. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C)      	② (C)-(B)-(D)
③ (C)-(D)-(B)      	④ (D)-(B)-(C)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)



49. 위 글의 밑줄 친 a[A] cup of coffee의 역할로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 강의 및 학습을 돕는 도구
② 수업 중 졸음을 방지하는 수단
③ 학생들 간의 친목을 도모하는 수단
④ 학습 과제를 제시하는 수단
⑤ 관찰력을 향상시키는 도구



50. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 필자는 신임 교수를 위한 워크숍에 참석했다.
② 수학 교수는 의사의 권유에 따라 커피를 마시지 않았다.
③ 필자는 월요일 아침 수업 시간에 커피를 마셨다.
④ 필자는 휴식 시간에 수학 교수와 이야기하였다.
⑤ 수학 교수는 수업 시간에 자신의 말이 너무 느리다고 생각한다.



제3교시
1
홀수형
성명
수험번호

  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

2010학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지

외국어(영어) 영역



1.  대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 야외용 식탁을 고르시오. 

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① frustrated	② jealous	③ indifferent
④ satisfied	⑤ grateful


3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. 
① 설사약	② 멀미약	③ 항생제
④ 소화제	⑤ 구충제


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① 환영 표지판 만들기	 공항에 마중 나가기
 집에 친구 초대하기	④ 자매 학교 방문하기
 시내 관광 시켜주기


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $180	② $190		③ $220	
④ $250	⑤ $290


6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 새로 개관한 공연장을 홍보하려고
② 공연장 놀이방 운영을 공지하려고
③ 공연 장소 변경에 대해 사과하려고
④ 공연장 내 질서 유지를 당부하려고
 공연장 물품 보관소에 대해 안내하려고

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오. 
① to replace the old bed with a new one
② to order a heater from the Internet
③ to set the room temperature higher
④ to buy an electric blanket
⑤ to go shopping together

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
① 학교 방송실	② 신문사 편집실	③ 광고사 기획실
④ 119 상황실	⑤ 도서관 휴게실

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
① 보안요원—가수	② 스턴트맨—분장사
③ 운동선수—트레이너	④ 영화감독—시나리오 작가
⑤ 건축 설계사—건물주

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
 마술 배우기	 노래 부르기
 새장 준비하기	 마술 의상 빌려오기 
 마술 클럽 가입하기

11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 공연을 관람하게 될 날짜를 고르시오.

12. World Tea Championship에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 녹차를 포함하여 세 부문에서 경쟁이 이루어진다. 
② 예선에서 15개국을 대표하는 참가자들이 경쟁했다. 
③ 결선에서의 심사 기준은 색, 향, 맛이다. 
④ 결선 심사는 이전 우승자들이 담당한다. 
 결선 진출자들에게 Tea Master 칭호를 부여한다. 
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
 
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:__________________________________________
① I think so. My uncle likes the game, too.
② All right, I’'ll go to the website right now.
③ Not really. The package will arrive in time
④ It’s my fault, I wish I hadn't returned the game.
⑤ I agree. We shouldn’t download games illegally.

15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:________________________________________   __ 
① Well done! I’ll buy you another monitor after work.
② Calm down. You can rewrite the report tomorrow.
③ That’s incredible! The program is so easy to use.
④ Thanks for the tip. I’ll go see if I can use it.
⑤ What a pity! I won’t back it up next time. 

16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Woman:__________________________________________
① Not at all. It’s my pleasure to help you out.
② I’m afraid it’s too late to make a reservation
③ I think taking the train will be better for me.
④ It’s OK. We’ll get there in about half an hour.
⑤ I don’t think so. I planned to meet my friend here.

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, 아버지가 Julie에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Julie’s father:______________________________________
① Be happy. At least you’re healthy.
② Cheer up. Let's take it to another hospital.
③ I’m sorry. There’s nothing we can do anyway.
④ That’s too bad. I've always liked cats better anyway.
⑤ Don’t worry. There are six other puppies to play with.

  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.


18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This, in the simplest definition, is a promise enforceable by law. The promise may be to do something or to stop from doing something. The making of this requires the mutual agreement of two or more persons or parties, one of them ordinarily making an offer and another accepting, If one of the parties fails to keep the promise, the other has rights to compensation. The law about this considers such questions as whether this exists, what the meaning of this is, whether this has been broken, and what compensation is due to the injured party.
① 계약     ② 고소     ③ 의회     ④ 신용	    ⑤ 선거

19. 밑줄 친 He[he]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
It was a beautiful Friday afternoon and the weekend was about to begin, but Rob had a lot on his mind. ①He had been putting off doing his chemistry report which was due on Monday. After borrowing some books from the library, he went home. Later that evening, ②he was doing the assignment when his father came in. “What are you doing, kid?” he asked. “Biography of Marie Curie,” Rob said absently as ③he was typing on his computer. “Really? I did that for a chemistry assignment when I was in school,” his father said. “Why don’t you find some information from the encyclopedia over there?” ④he added. Rob grabbed the encyclopedia. He smiled thinking that even though he was practically born playing computer games, ⑤he was still doing the same assignments his father did over 20 years ago.
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Upon receiving your last letter, I rushed to look up the word 'flattering' in the dictionary, I was shocked to find out that it could imply something negative, which I certainly did not mean. I should have used some wordlike 'complimentary' instead. For that, I would like to ask for the kindness in your heart to forgive my unintended offense. If you knew me well, you would know that I am shameless enough to take all compliments at their face value and not to think that they might be mere flattery. I just did not know what the word really implied, I hope that you no longer feel hurt or uncomfortable in any way as a result of our correspondence.
① 무례한 태도에 대하여 항의하려고
② 훌륭하게 쓰여진 편지를 칭찬하려고
③ 단어를 잘못 사용한 것에 대하여 사과하려고
④ 전문 용어에 대한 정확한 의미를 문의하려고
⑤ 좋은 사전을 선물해 준 것에 대하여 감사하려고
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
While awaiting the birth of a new baby, North American parents typically furnish a room as the infant’s sleeping quarters. For decades, child-rearing advice from experts has (A) encouraged / been encouraged the nighttime separation of baby from parent. For example, a study recommends that babies be moved into their own room by three months of age. “By six months a child (B) who / whom regularly sleeps in her parents’ room is likely to become dependent on this arrangement,” reports the study. Yet parent-infant ‘co-sleeping’ is the norm for approximately 90 percent of the world’s population. Cultures as (C) diverse / diversely as the Japanese, the Guatemalan Maya, and the Inuit of Northwestern Canada practice it. 
   (A) 			    		 (B)		  (C)
① encouraged	    	……	who		  ……		diverse
② encouraged	    	……	whom	  ……		diversely
③ encouraged	    	……	who		  ……		diversely
④ been encouraged  	……	who		  ……		diverse
⑤ been encouraged 	……	whom	  ……		diverse

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
While manned space missions are more costly than unmanned ① ones, they are more successful. Robots and astronauts use ② much of the same equipment in space. But a human is much more capable of operating those instruments correctly and ③ to place them in appropriate and useful positions. Rarely ④ is a computer more sensitive and accurate than a human in managing the same geographical or environmental factors. Robots are also not equipped with capabilities like humans to solve problems ⑤ as they arise, and they often collect data that are unhelpful or irrelevant.

23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Most of you experience urges when trying to break a habit and these can be hard to resist unless you find something else to do instead, and best of all, something that uses the same part of the body - even the same muscles. ① If the habit involves your hands, as when pulling out hair, then try to occupy them in some other way. ② Playing with a toy or opening and closing your fists for a couple of minutes might be an answer. ③ The habit of scratching can be replaced with rubbing in some lotion or patting with the palm of the hand. ④ If the itches, however, do not disappear, stop scratching and take the medicine. ⑤ One 35-year-o1d woman who used to rub her eyes with her hands until they became sore and infected found it helpful to put on make-up when she was tempted to rub.
[24~27]다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

24.  In this modem world, People are not used to living with discomfort. We expect immediate results and satisfaction. We want answers faster than they can be delivered. There is twenty-four-hour repair and round-the-clock shopping. If we are hungry, there is always food available, from microwave dinners to all-night grocery stores and restaurants. People no longer know how to wait, or even what waiting means, It is nice to have what you want when you want it, but the ability to delay satisfaction is important.           is clearly an important virtue, yet so many people stand in front of their microwaves thinking “Hurry up!”
① Ambition        ② Patience 			  ③ Honesty
④ Modesty         ⑤ Diligence

25.  The goal of medicine as it is currently practiced is to develop procedures and drugs that work equally well on all patients, regardless of gender, age, or genetics, It derives from the prevalent belief that all of us are similar bio-mechanical units that rolled off the same assembly line - a most imperfect conception of human beings that limits conventional medicine's effectiveness. The doctor of the future, however, needs to practice medicine in fundamentally different ways. One of the most important shifts will be an increased recognition of             , a concept now largely ignored. Instead of treating different patients that display similar symptoms with the same drugs, doctors should identify root causes of disease to come up with a personalized treatment.
① group therapy 	② patient individuality 
③ medical technology 	④ doctors' qualifications 
⑤ wonder drugs

26.   For the most part, we like things that are familiar to us. To prove the point to yourself, try a little experiment. Get the negative of an old photograph that shows a front view of your face and have it developed into a pair of pictures one that shows you as you actually look and one that shows a reverse image so that the right and left sides of your face are interchanged. Now decide which version of your face you like better and ask a good friend to make the choice, too. If you are like most people, you should notice something odd: Your friend will prefer the true print, but you will prefer the reverse image. Why? Because you both will be responding favorably to the more familiar face - your friend to              and you to the reversed one you find in the mirror every day. [3점] 
                                 * negative: [사진] 원판① his own true face
② other people's faces
③ the one the world sees
④ the negative of his own face
⑤ the one more recently photographed

27.   The human auditory system               . A psychologist named Richard Warren demonstrated this particularly well. He recorded a sentence and cut out apiece of the sentence from the recording tape. He replaced the missing piece with a burst of static of the same duration. Nearly everyone who heard the altered recording could report that they heard both a sentence and static. But a majority of people could not tell where the static was! The auditory system had filled in the missing speech information, so that the sentence seemed uninterrupted. Most people reported that there was static and that it existed apart from the spoken sentence. The static and the sentence formed separate perceptual streams due to differences in the quality of sound that caused them to group separately.                      * static: 잡음(雜音)
① recognizes incorrect pronunciation
② plays an important role in speaking
③ has its own version of perceptual completion
④ reacts differently according to different languages
⑤ analyzes auditory and visual cues at the same time

28.   Not all authors trusted that the theater audience would automatically understand their plays in the intended manner. Thus, they repeatedly attempted to make it clear to their public that visiting the theater was not merely for the purpose of entertainment, but rather to draw lessons from the play offered onstage. It was, therefore, important for the viewer                so as to facilitate interpretation of the content. This idea was developed by Bertolt Brecht with his ‘epic theater,’ which used alienation as a strategy to prevent the identification of the public with the figures of the drama. Through scattered narration and commentary throughout the play, for example, the viewers are invited to take a step back from the performance. In this way, they are given hints to better understand the play while the conclusion is left open so as to leave them to draw their own conclusions.  [3점]
① to imitate the actor's performance
② to learn about the play beforehand 
③ to identify himself with the actors on the stage
④ to bridge the gap between himself and the actors
⑤ to create a distance from the actions on the stage

29.  다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
After dinner he built a fire, going out into the weather for wood he had piled against the garage. The air was bright and cold against his face, and the snow in the driveway was already halfway to his knees. He gathered logs, shaking off their soft white caps and carrying them inside. He sat for a time in front of the fireplace, cross-legged, adding logs, and gazing at the warm fire. Outside, snow continued to fall quietly in the cones of light cast by the streetlights. By the time he rose and looked out the window, his car had become a soft white hill on the edge of the street.
① calm and peaceful 	② lively and festive
③ funny and amusing 	④ exciting and thrilling
⑤ promising and hopeful 


30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? 

Figures A and B demonstrate how dew point is measured by a dew point hygrometer. In Figure A, light is transmitted from a laser and ① reflected off the mirror onto a receiver that measures the intensity of the observed light. When the mirror temperature is above dew point and the intensity of the transmitted light is 10 mW/cm2, the intensity of the observed light is ② the same . In Figure B, when the mirror temperature is at dew point, dew drops cover the ③ surface of the mirror. When the transmitted light hits the dew drops, it becomes ④ scattered. As a consequence, compared to the intensity of the transmitted light, that of the observed light measured by the receiver is ⑤ increased.
    * hygrometer: 습도계 ** mW/cm2 : 빛의 세기 단위

31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Responses to survey questions are influenced by events, and we should consider this when reviewing the results of a survey. The reputation of an airline, for example, will be (A) damaged / recovered if a survey is conducted just after a plane crash. A computer company lost its reputation in company surveys just after major news coverage about a defect in its products. On the positive side, surveys by a beverage company about its image showed very (B) hostile / favorable public attitudes just after its massive investment in the Olympics. Consequently, surveys should be conducted when the organization is not in the news or connected to a significant event that may influence public opinion. In neutral context, a more (C) valid / biased survey can be conducted about an organization’s reputation, products, or services.
  (A) 			    	 (B)		  	(C)
① damaged	    	……	hostile		  ……	biased
② damaged	    	……	hostile	  		……	valid
③ damaged	    	……	favorable		……	valid
④ recovered 	……	hostile		  ……	biased
⑤ recovered 	……	favorable	  ……	valid
32. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
War seems to be part of the history of humanity. Countries, regions, and even villages were economically independent of one another in the past. Under those circumstances, the destruction of our enemy might have been a victory for us. There was a relevance to violence and war.   (A)  , today we are so interdependent that the concept of war has become outdated. When we face problems or disagreements today, we have to arrive at solutions through dialog. We must work to resolve conflicts in a spirit of reconciliation and always keep in mind the interests of others. We cannot destroy our neighbors! We cannot ignore their interests! Doing so would ultimately cause us to suffer.   (B)  , the concept of violence is now unsuitable, and nonviolence is the appropriate method.
     (A)		       (B)
①However  	……			Otherwise
②However		……			Therefore
③Nonetheless	……			Otherwise
④Similarly		……			Therefore
⑤Similarly		……			In contrast

[33~34]다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. Imagine that you are in a meeting. Your party and the other party are sitting across a table. You ask a question on a particular subject and the answer is unsatisfactory. What would be the best response? It is none at all. So if you are seeking more information or a different kind of information, ask for it by remaining silent. When there is a long pause in the conversation, people feel an overwhelming need to fill it. If someone has finished speaking and you do not play along by taking up your end of the dialog, that person will automatically start to elaborate. Eventually, they may say what you want to hear.
① 의견 교환 시 대화 예절의 중요성
② 대화를 통한 창의적 사고 신장의 필요성
③ 바람직한 대화를 위한 적극적 태도의 필요성
④ 회의의 효율적 진행을 위한 사회자의 중요성
⑤ 만족스러운 답변을 얻기 위한 침묵의 효용성

34. A forest fire in Brazil affects the weather in Moscow by creating huge dust clouds that eventually float over Russia. Every element in an ecosystem depends on every other element, even the so-called nonliving elements such as minerals, oxygen, and sunlight. Yes, light is an integral element of all life. The sun is food for many of earth’s life forms. Physicists speak of photons of light as being interchangeable. When the light from an object hits a person, only some of it bounces off. Most of the photons are absorbed into the person. Its energy becomes that person’s energy. This is how incredible interdependence is everything is constantly becoming everything else.			 * photon: 광자(光子)
① the connectedness of elements in nature
② the importance of light as a food source
③ the effects of forest fires on the environment
④ the causes of dramatic changes in the weather
⑤ the consequences of the destruction of ecosystems

35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?

The graph above shows the growth rate of total output in the U.S. from 1960 to 1999. The growth rate of total output is equal to the growth rate in the number of hours worked plus the growth rate of labor productivity. ① The 1960-1969 period displayed the highest growth rate of total output of all the periods in the graph. ② The growth rate of total output declined from the 1960-1969  period to the 1980-1989 period. ③ The only period where the growth rate in the number of hours worked exceeded the labor productivity growth rate was the 1980 1989 period. ④ The 1990-1994 period showed an increase in the growth rate of total output from the 1980-1989 period. ⑤ The 1995-1999 period displayed the second highest growth rate of total output and the greatest labor productivity growth rate of all the time periods.

36.  다음 글에서 smallmouth bass에 관한 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Like its largemouth cousin, the smallmouth bass is a native of the Mississippi drainage, which makes it a true heartland fish. Whereas the largemouth likes slow or still water with lots of food-holding weeds, the smallmouth prefers clean, rocky bottoms and swifter water, ideally in the range of 65° to 68°F. In waters warmer than 73°F, you can forget about finding one. In lakes, smallmouth often school up, which means that if you catch one, you can catch a bunch. In rivers and streams, they are more solitary. The smallmouth has a series of dark vertical bands along its sides. The dorsal fin is one continuous fin (as opposed to the separated dorsal fin of the largemouth).				* dorsal fin: 등지느러미
① Mississippi강으로 유입된 외래종이다. 
② 물의 흐름이 느린 곳을 좋아한다. 
③ 73℉ 이상의 물에서 쉽게 찾아 볼 수 있다. 
④ 호수보다 강에서 떼를 지어 다닌다. 
⑤ 몸통의 옆면에는 거무스름한 띠들이 있다. 
37. Chattanooga에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? 
Starting in the 1960s, People began flooding into Chattanooga, a former factory town, to explore its caves, rivers, and cliffs. Before long more than 3,800 caves surrounding the city had been discovered. The nearby Ocoee was among the most paddled rivers in the country and six major climbing sites sprang up within an hour’s drive of city limits. But in spite of this boundless outdoors potential, there remained the problem of Chattanooga proper, a post-industrial wasteland that made the city the kind of place you would visit but would never want to live in. Not, that is, until lately. Over the past decade, Chattanooga has made an incredible urban come back: electric buses, organic markets, and a 120-million-dollar riverfront restoration project completed last year. In addition, beautiful modem architecture such as the post-modem museum and the newly remodeled aquarium plays a big role in the comeback of Chattanooga.
① 강, 절벽 등을 탐험하기 위해 1960년대부터 사람들이 몰려들었다. 
② 주변에서 3,800개 이상의 동굴들이 발견되었다. 
③ 주요 등반 장소가 도시 경계에서 차로 한 시간 이내의 거리에 생겼다. 
④ 강변지역 복구사업은 일억 이천만 달러를 들여 진행되고 있다. 
⑤ 현대식 건축물들이 도시의 모습을 되찾는 데 큰 역할을 하고 있다. 

[38~39]다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. In practical situations where there is no room for error, we have learned to avoid vagueness in communication. A fire chief, for example, needs to issue his orders with absolute clarity. In imaginative situations, however, there is the danger that too much specificity can limit your imagination. Let’s suppose that the same fire chief has asked you to paint a picture on the side of his firehouse. If he tells you what he wants it to look like right down to the last detail, he has not given you any room for your imagination. However, if the assignment were stated somewhat vaguely, then you would have more room to think and be more creative.
① 소방관들은 업무 수행 시 정확한 의사소통이 필요하다. 
② 상사는 부하의 업무에 지나치게 간섭하지 않는 것이 좋다. 
③ 정확한 정보 해석을 위해서 여러 가능성을 고려해야 한다. 
④ 대화에서는 애매한 표현을 사용하지 않는 것이 바람직하다. 
⑤ 상상력이 필요한 상황에서는 다소 모호한 말이 도움이 될 수 있다. 

39. Although a speech can be effective, all the words in the world cannot measure up to the example of a leader, especially in communicating new behaviors and values. There is often no more effective way to help people understand the message than to have it modeled for them by the manager. Words can yield a variety of interpretations in terms of the kind of behaviors people think they mean. But a manager’s actions provide a clear model of exactly the kind of behavior required. Managers who want people to take a more team-based approach with their people, for example, will almost certainly get better results by taking a more team-based approach themselves rather than just by making a speech on teamwork.
① Old habits die hard.
② Time waits for no man.
③ Two heads are better than one.
④ Actions speak louder than words.
⑤ A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.


40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은? 
However, now that the economy is characterized more by the exchange of information than by hard goods, geographical centrality has been replaced by attempts to create a sense of cultural centrality.

Now, as always, cities are desperate to create the impression that they lie at the center of something or other. ( ① ) This idea of centrality may be locational, namely that a city lies at the geographical center of England, Europe, and so on. ( ② ) This draws on a well-established notion that geographical centrality makes a place more accessible, easing communication and communication costs. ( ③ ) Cultural centrality usually demonstrates itself as a cry that a city is at the center of the action. ( ④ ) This means that the city has an abundance of cultural activities, such as restaurants, theater, ballet, music, sport, and scenery. ( ⑤ ) The suggestion is that people will want for nothing in this city.



[41~42]다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
41. Young children rarely think of their art as personal property. Often they throw it away or give it away. This suggests that much of the value of art for a child consists in making it. Interestingly, art in tribal societies is frequently abandoned after it has served its purpose. The focus is on the magical, expressive, and social value of the act of making. Some contemporary artists share this feeling, but they are also caught up in the system of art exhibition, the selling of their art, and the requirements of an art market. This results in a tension in the art world that is largely unresolved -1he tension between art as a satisfying mode of expression and art as a precious collectible object, between the experience of making and the experience of owning. 
① Art in Tribal Societies
② Conflicting Views on Art
③ Traditional vs. Contemporary Art
④ Using Art for Children's Education
⑤ Modem Art Museums: Magical Places
42. The age of 3 is not without its charm. One of the more amusing aspects of this age is the child’s often vivid imagination, expressed most strikingly in his enjoyment of imaginary companions. Though some people have felt that only the lonely play with imaginary playmates, our research makes it very evident that it is often the highly superior and imaginative child who invents these creatures. They are very real to him, very important, and, we can assure you, quite harmless. Even though it may be annoying to have to lay a place at dinner or keep an extra seat in the family automobile for his ‘friend’ who exists only in your child's imagination, it is probably well worthwhile.
① Making New Friends at School
② Be a Role Model for Your Child
③ How Can You Make Your Child Creative?
④ Child's Imaginary Friend: Need for Worry?
⑤ Various Aspects of Children's Imagination







43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Rosalyn’s parents did everything possible to avoid favoring one child over the others, and this resulted in her feelings being hurt. One year Rosalyn asked her mother to prepare a special treat for her birthday: the honey cake that Rosalyn had always loved.	

(A) Upon receiving the cake, Rosalyn became disappointed. It was, after all, her birthday; couldn't she be singled out on one day of the year? A parent’s admirable efforts not to play favorites can mean that no child gets the whole cake of parental love.
(B) Her mother said she couldn't. If she made a honey cake for Rosalyn, she’d have to make cakes for Rosalyn’s two sisters, and she didn't have time to make three cakes.
(C) In the end, her mother did give Rosalyn a honey cake on her birthday - a really small one, because she split the batter for one cake into three parts, to treat her daughters equally.               
                                      * batter: 반죽

① (A)-(C)-(B)   ② (B)-(A)-(C)	   ③ (B)-(C)-(A)	
④ (C)-(A)-(B)   ⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)
44. 다음 글의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
How can you create closeness when the two of you are hundreds of miles apart? How can you make the person you are talking to on the phone feel special when you cannot pat their back or give them a little hug? The answer is simple. Just use your caller's name far more often than you would in person, In fact, shower your conversations with his or her name. Saying a person's name too often in face-to-face conversation sounds manipulative. However, on the phone the effect is dramatically different. If you heard someone say your name, even if you were being pushed around in a big noisy crowd, you would pay attention and listen.
① 멀리 사는 친구와의 우정을 위해 가끔씩 전화해라.
② 대화 중에는 상대의 몸짓에 나타나는 의미를 잘 살펴라.
③ 공공장소에서는 너무 큰 소리로 전화 통화를 하지 마라.
④ 시끄러운 장소에서 친구와 대화할 때는 평소보다 천천히 말해라.
⑤ 전화통화에서 친밀감을 주려면 상대의 이름을 자주 불러주어라.

45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many years ago, psychologists performed an experiment in which they put a number of people in a room, alone except for a ring toss set. It was one of those children’s toys with a short wooden post held upright on the floor and a bunch of round rings. The subjects were left alone to amuse themselves as best they could. As expected, with time to kill, they began trying to toss the rings around the post. What the psychologists discovered was that most of the people moved far enough away from the post so that tossing the rings around it was challenging but not so difficult as to be totally frustrating. In other words, they deliberately positioned themselves between frustration on the one hand and boredom on the other. The process of alternately producing and relieving tension was what made the activity stimulating.
󰀻
Subjects tended to make a ring toss activity stimulating by producing just enough   (A)   through varying the	distance to the post so as to   (B)     frustration and boredom.
           (A)  			  (B)
① tension	……	create 
② tension	……	balance
③ competition	……	multiply 
④ energy	……	hide 
⑤ energy	……	increase
[46~48]다음을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
(A)
On the wall of our dining room was a framed quotation: “Let me live in a house by the side of the road and be a friend to man.” It inspired in me countless childhood daydreams about meeting new people from exotic places. I was a child who desperately wanted to connect with others. We did live ‘by the side of the road’ - on Route 9 between Keene and Portsmouth - but in a place so remote it was extremely difficult to be a ‘friend to man.’

(B)
Why couldn’t others also benefit from that value? I could save people the trouble of going into the store by making my produce accessible at the side of the road, and that would provide value, too. Surely I could convince people to pay half of what the grocery store charged and to feel lucky about the bargain. Suddenly, I saw a connection between those bumpy vegetables on our table and the quotation on the wall; I found a way to satisfy my longing for                  These homely fruits and vegetables would become my golden apples.	

(C)
One day when our family drove into town, I focused intently on the big, paper, grocery store signs advertising the same type of produce that we grew: ‘carrots, 50 cents a bunch,’ ‘tomatoes, 99 cents a pound.’ Meanwhile, I thought of how the type of ‘imperfect’ produce we ate for dinner, just as healthy as that sold at the store, was often tossed on the compost heap or left in the ground.		 
                         * compost heap: 퇴비 더미

(D)
The unattractive produce such as crooked carrots and odd-looking tomatoes was not valuable to the grocery store, where only ‘perfect’ produce was sold. But I knew they would have value to people who would chop them into salads or soups, can them, or use them to make pies, because that is what our family did with them. They were fresh and clean and came straight from the good earth.	

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(C)-(D)    ② (B)- (D)-(C)   ③ (C)-(B)-(D)
④ (C)-(D)-(B)    ⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)

47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① new friends	② family reunions
③ mass production	④ farm reconstruction
⑤ complete independence
48. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Keene과 Portsmouth 사이의 9번 도로변에 살았다. 
② 식료품점에 가는 사람들의 수고를 덜어줄 수 있다고 생각했다. 
③ 식료품점의 당근과 토마토 광고를 주의깊게 보았다. 
④ 토마토를 파운드당 99센트에 팔았다. 
⑤ 모양이 이상해 식료품점에서 팔지 않는 야채도 가치있다고 생각했다. 

[49~50]다음을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 

A friend of mine and his wife were in Hawaii, standing on a beach, watching a beautiful sunset-hardly able to believe how magnificent the sight was. A woman approached them and overheard my friend’s wife say, “I can’t believe how beautiful this is.” While walking away from the spectacular display, the woman said, “You should have seen it in Tahiti.”
When your attention is not on the present moment but on something else, you will tend to                 , as the Tahiti traveler did, or you will wonder about future experiences instead of enjoying the present one, and regret past experiences because they are already over. But as you learn to bring your attention back to the here and now, life will come alive again, providing the enjoyment and satisfaction it was meant to. Thus, when you live in the present moment, one of the nice things that happens to you is that ordinary, everyday life takes on a new significance. Taking walks, watching a sunset, gardening, reading a book, all begin to feel special. When your attention is brought back to the here and now, you engage in life rather than think about life.

49. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① think about future events in your life
② concentrate better on the event at hand
③ compare even good experiences with others
④ be totally satisfied with the ongoing event
⑤ share the moment with your loved ones

50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Living Today to the fullest
② Traveling to Exotic Places
③ What Are Friends for?
④ Releasing Your Hidden Power
⑤ Creating Future-Oriented Attitudes


* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.



2010학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지

제 3 교시       외국어(영어) 영역
 

성명


수험번호





3




                

◦문제지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 쓰시오.
◦답안지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 쓰고, 또 수험 번호와 답을 정확히 표시하시오.
◦문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을 참고하시오. 1점과 3점 문항에만 점수가 표시되어 있습니다. 점수 표시가 없는 문항은 모두 2점입니다.


1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.


1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 만들 가방의 디자인을 고르시오.

①

②



③

④



⑤








2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① amused	② jealous	③ bored
④ lonely	⑤ worried

3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. [1점]

①

②
 
③




④
 
⑤
 






4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 헬멧 가져오기	② 자전거 꺼내 오기
③ 일기예보 확인하기	④ 바퀴에 바람 넣기
⑤ 안장 높이 조절하기

5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $320	② $330	③ $400	④ $420	⑤ $430
6.다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 도서관 이용 시간 변경을 공지하려고
② 새로운 도서관 명칭을 공모하려고
③ 학습실의 청결 유지를 호소하려고
④ 학습실 개방 사실을 홍보하려고
⑤ 도서관 폐쇄에 대해 항의하려고

7.대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 선생님께 전화하기	② 영수증 찾아 주기
③ 학교에 데려다 주기	④ 준비물 가져다 주기
⑤ 참가 동의서 작성하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
① 방송국	② 음식점	③ 사진관
④ 박물관	⑤ 면접시험장

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 미용사 - 고객	② 매니저 - 가수 
③ 지휘자 - 관객	④ 만화가 - 문하생
⑤ 운동선수 - 팬

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to shop around for a new bed
② to buy new dishes and furniture
③ to move the bed into her house
④ to take her son to a garage sale
⑤ to call a repairman to fix the bed

11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 관람할 공연을 고르시오.


Date 
Time 
Romeo 
&
Juliet
①
11 (Fri.)
7:00 PM
Jim Evans 
&
Betty Hart
②
12 (Sat.)
3:00 PM
Bill Edison 
&
Cindy Miller
③
12 (Sat.)
7:00 PM
Jim Evans
&
Betty Hart
④
13 (Sun.)
3:00 PM
Tom Brown 
&
Ann Scott
⑤
13 (Sun.)
7:00 PM
Bill Edison
&
Cindy Miller



12. York Gardens의 행사에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 4월 마지막 토요일에 개최된다.
② 튤립 축제는 오전 11시부터 오후 4시까지 진행된다.
③ 안내를 받으면서 정원과 온실을 구경할 수 있다.
④ 조류 관찰을 위한 출발 지점은 안내소이다.
⑤ 조류 관찰 행사에 참가하려면 예약을 해야 한다.

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.



①	②	③	④	⑤

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:                                                 
① It’ll be too hard for her, but we can try.
② I’d rather wear glasses than contact lenses.
③ Take it easy. The checkup won’t take long.
④ I’m glad that she’s recovered and come home.
⑤ Yes. She needs to take a painkiller sometimes.

15.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:                                              
① Okay. This one is really lucky today.
② Right. Fish will die in the dirty water.
③ Yes. It’s hard to measure a large fish.
④ Sounds great! I want to go fishing with you.
⑤ Yeah. I’ll tell Grandma to make dinner with this.

16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:                                                 
① Cheer up! I’m sure you can beat him.
② I think you can help him change his habits.
③ He should bounce the ball more than twice.
④ I can see it now. I think I can handle his serves.
⑤ I’m sorry to hear that he gave up tomorrow’s game.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Amber가 남자에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Amber:                                               
① Okay. Let’s stop and call it a day.
② No, thanks. I’ll go home to pick up mine.
③ Please use mine. I don’t need it right now.
④ Thank you for letting me use your mouse.
⑤ Really? Then, why don’t you buy one right now?




이제 듣기․말하기 문제는 다 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.



18. 밑줄 친 this가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
I used to hear Chopin, but recently I listen to Mozart because everybody says listening to Mozart’s music will make me smart. I also hear many stories including Aesop’s fables and Andersen’s fairy tales. My favorite story is “The Frog Prince,” and I’ve almost learned it by heart because I’ve heard it dozens of times. These days some stories are told in a foreign language, but I can’t understand them very well because the language is not my mother tongue. Apart from listening to music and stories, you will never know how many things I learn through this. Although I am still inside my mom and have never seen the world through my own eyes, I feel I’m quite familiar with the world outside thanks to this. I can’t wait to see the people who have been nurturing and communicating with me for nine months.
① 태교	② 명상	③ 독서
④ 조기 유학	⑤ 음악 감상



19. 밑줄 친 He[he]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
A salesman called on a young grocer named Barney, trying to sell him canned corn. The salesman was especially proud of the fancy label on the can. He said that the customers wouldn’t be able to resist it, so Barney decided to give the product a chance. ①He had a small kitchen at the rear of his store where he tested products. Walking to the back, ②he tore off the fancy label and deliberately threw it on the floor. “My customers don’t eat labels. They eat what’s inside,” ③he told the salesman, who was surprised and fell speechless. While ④he was waiting in fear, the young grocer opened the can―it was full of hulls! The grocer didn’t order the canned corn. Word spread and Barney gained the reputation that ⑤he sold products of good quality.                            *hull: 껍데기, 쭉정이
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I somewhat disagree with everyone saying Mr. Peterson’s class is boring and too demanding. I’ve had Mr. Peterson for StatisticsⅠandⅡ, andI can honestly say that he is detail-oriented and expects a lot from his students. But statistics is about details, facts, and effort among other things. If you’re looking for an easy A, think about taking an easier class; you won’t have to complain about homework or low grades. Mr. Peterson knows his stuff, has a lot of experience, and is very approachable. When I had him, I  didn’t get many poor remarks; on the rare occasions I did, it didn’t affect my grade. Overall, this is a class that will give you as much as you put into it.
① to decline a job offer
② to recommend a course
③ to hire a new professor
④ to ask for a quick reply
⑤ to complain about grading

21. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Bright sunlight filters through the ever-present playground dust. A group of children are playing baseball on the ground. In the distance, there is the faint sound of shouting, a crowd coming closer. Then the crowd bursts through the playground and makes for the airfield. The children see the crowd surging around the field and charging toward a landing helicopter. They also run for the helicopter. A famous movie star Bruce Rain gets out of the helicopter. A boy at the front of the crowd holds out his photograph and the movie star takes it and scribbles his autograph on it. He hands the photograph back to the boy as his bodyguards surround him and hustle him into a car.
① exciting and noisy	② tense and gloomy
③ calm and peaceful	④ warm and romantic
⑤ scary and frightening

22. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sleep deprivation has a great influence on the immune system. Consider what happens in public schools in December just before the winter break. Kids get sick. Teachers get sick. Parents get sick. We tend to think there are just a lot of viruses (A)go/going around. In reality, the main reason for these minor but unpleasant illnesses (B)are/is that we are exhausted. Students and teachers are all sleep-deprived from the constant stress of the first semester, and it begins to catch up with us. Our immune systems are not functioning as (C)effective/effectively as they do when we are well rested, and we get sick. What do most of us do when the winter break comes? We try to get caught up on sleep.
	(A)	(B)	(C)
① go	……	are	……	effective
② go	……	are	……	effectively
③ going	……	is	……	effectively
④ go	……	is	……	effectively
⑤ going	……	is	……	effective

23. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
It was Mary’s thirteenth birthday. It was also her first birthday at her uncle’s house. Everyone brought out gifts for Mary: stockings from Elena, a purse from Steve, and a pair of very old silver earrings from Chris, who said she ①had had them since she was a little girl. Uncle Jack gave a lengthy speech about ②how Mary was like a daughter to him and to Aunt Barbara. And then, he handed her an envelope in ③which was tucked a fifty-dollar bill. Mary was to buy ④herself some new clothes with Aunt Barbara’s help and advice. A miracle! So many presents and so much money all at once made her eyes ⑤shone. She wanted to kiss everybody.

[24~28] 다음 글의 빈 칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24.A speaker begins his presentation by reaching into his pocket, holds up a twenty-dollar bill, and says, “This twenty is for sale for exactly one dollar. Who wants to buy it?” Would you leap to your feet to get his attention? Or would you wait a few seconds, and after a hand or two goes up, timidly raise your own? If you’re one of the hesitaters, you’re normal. Once someone else is willing to take a chance, then our greedy little hands pop up, and we tend to go along. The faster others’ hands are raised, the greater the desire, and the more likely we are to be part of it. Our sense of the value of an object is reinforced by the                   that has been created for that object.
① demand	② design		③ brand
④ criticism	⑤ investment

25.Women have a more sensitive touch than men because of their        . A professor in McMaster University in Ontario, Canada and his team measured the surface areas of index fingers in 100 students and then asked them to feel surfaces marked with progressively finer grooves. When the grooves get too narrow for someone’s sense of touch, the surface feels smooth. On average, men could detect grooves down to 1.59mm wide, whereas women detected grooves at 1.41mm. The ability to discriminate the grooves on the surfaces fell by 0.25mm for every square-centimeter increase in finger area. The team found that sweat pores and the skin’s touch receptors are more densely packed as finger size decreases.		              *groove: 가늘고 긴 홈
① smoother skin	② larger pores
③ cleaner hands	④ thinner bones
⑤ smaller fingers
26.When you are taking an essay test,                 . Some experts or teachers must have spent quite a long time deciding them. Notice the key words. The words in them have been chosen with great care and mean precisely what they say. For example, if it asks you to ‘prove’ something, you should not ‘describe’ or ‘explain’ it. You might get a few marks even if your answers don’t focus on the word ‘prove’, but you certainly wouldn’t get full marks. Also, notice especially where the words are used in the singular and where they are used in the plural. If a question asks for ‘reasons’, one reason isn’t going to be enough. If it asks for ‘problems’, again one problem isn’t going to be adequate.
① read the questions carefully
② watch out for spelling mistakes
③ use your experience and knowledge
④ distinguish between facts and opinions
⑤ avoid the words used in the given text

27.During the Middle Ages, the Rhine River was a great European trade route protected by the Holy Roman Empire. Merchant ships paid a modest toll to safeguard their transit. However, after the Empire weakened during the thirteenth century, many freelance barons built castles on the Rhine and began collecting their own illegal tolls. Each argued that he had the rights to collect tolls. The growing number of these “robber baron” tollbooths made shipping unmanageable. Eventually, the merchants couldn’t afford the tolls. The river continued to flow, but boatmen would no longer bother making the journey. Because of the decreased trade, the European economic pie shrank. Wealth disappeared. As                           , everybody lost, even the barons themselves.                 *freelance baron: 독립적인 지방 호족
① collecting tolls was prohibited
② technology innovation did not occur
③ all power was concentrated in one person
④ too many people owned pieces of one thing
⑤ merchant groups gained power over the Empire

28.For the first year of sound film, it seemed that audiences would see any film that “talked.” When audience attendance dropped by 20 percent in the early part of 1929, however, film producers had to reexamine their product. Sound had made almost useless the techniques that directors had acquired through years of silent films. In effect, sound                          . For example, because the noise of the camera could be picked up by the sound system, the camera had to be encased in a large heavy soundproof box, which made the camera stationary. In addition, the actors had to use the microphones hidden on the set (in telephones, flower vases, etc.); they could never move away from the microphones. They often appeared rather odd as they stood speaking into a vase of flower. [3점]
① increased the cost of producing a movie
② attracted more people to movie theaters
③ forced movie actors to practice a lot more
④ undermined the motion of the motion picture
⑤ led producers to cast actors based on their voice

29. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

        Figure1        Figure2     Figure3       Figure4

30in.
25in.
30in.
17in.


Would you like to see birds and fish playing together? Secure two glass vessels having straight sides of the same ①height, one 25 inches in diameter (Figure1) and the other 17 inches (Figure2). The smaller is placed within the larger, the ②bottoms being covered with moss and aquarium decorations. Fill the space between the vessels with water. Cut a piece of copper screen into a ③circular form to cover the larger vessel, and hang a bird swing in the center (Figure3). Place the screen on top of the vessels so that the swing will hang in the center of the inner vessel. A ④weight should be placed on top of the screen, over the smaller vessel, to keep it from floating. Put your canary birds in the ⑤outer vessel and some goldfish in the water between the vessels. Now you have a small world where birds and fish seem to play together underwater (Figure4).

30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Decades ago, my high school chemistry teacher slowly (A)reserved/released hydrogen sulfide from a hidden container he opened just before we entered his classroom. A few minutes after we took our seats and he began his lecture, a foul odor filled the classroom, grabbing our attention. We groaned, laughed, and looked around for the offending source. We would have appeared (B)focused/unfocused to an outside observer entering our class at that time. However, this demonstration literally led me by the nose to follow his description of the diffusion of gases through other gases. During that class I was able to (C)process/block the information about gas diffusion through my senses and ultimately stored it in my long-term memory.
*hydrogen sulfide: 황화수소   **diffusion: 확산
	(A)	(B)	(C)
① reserved	……	focused	……	process
② reserved	……	unfocused	……	block
③ released	……	unfocused	……	process
④ released	……	unfocused	……	block
⑤ released	……	focused	……	process
31. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Scientists are looking into the seas in search of medicines that may work better, with fewer side effects, than conventional drugs. ①The ocean has already given us wonderful drugs derived from salmon, omega-3 fish oils for heart disease and bone replacements from coral. ②Another marine medicine in the works is a promising new cancer drug derived from bacteria that live inside a moss-like sea creature. ③Some fish farms tend to use several antibiotic drugs known to cause cancer to increase their production. ④Unlike conventional drugs that kill cancer cells, the drug makes them go back to normal cells. ⑤And some antibiotics being made from cells in fish may even be effective against antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
*antibiotic-resistant: 항생제에 내성이 있는

32. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
As a member of the Teen Council, I had to speak to the Community Council to support building an ice skating rink in our community. The audience was made up of many parents and some young people, most of whom I knew. I did not focus on my friends’ concerns for fun. 　  (A)  　, I talked to the people who would make the decision―the parents. To address their concerns about safety I discussed the security that comes from knowing where a child is, the presence of a professional rink staff, and the careful selection of rules for using the rink safely. 　  (B)   , I explained that the price of admission will be relatively low, as will the rental and maintenance fees. The result exceeded my expectation. Everybody agreed.
	(A)	(B)
① Instead	……	In addition
② Instead	……	However
③ Therefore	……	In addition
④ Therefore	……	However
⑤ Similarly	……	However

[33~34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33.Flying off to a foreign country for affordable cosmetic surgery has been a popular option for years. But now, because of rising health care costs, travelers are going abroad for routine surgeries and procedures. By 2012, experts predict, medical tourism will turn into a $100 billion international industry with more than 780 million patients seeking health care abroad. The line between vacation and health care will continue to blur. Next year Singapore will open Asia’s first medical hotel, a 260-room luxury high-rise connected to the east wing of the new hospital in Farrer Park. The hotel will feature a 500-seat conference hall, indoor and outdoor gardens, and a spa, as well as various medical equipment for patients who don’t want to stay in the hospital. It will add new meaning to the concept of a healing holiday.
① 의료 장비의 현대화
② 의료 관광 산업의 발달
③ 여행과 질병 확산의 관계
④ 싱가포르 관광 산업의 성공 요인
⑤ 경기 침체가 관광 산업에 미치는 영향


34.We conducted research to find whether people explain what happened to them positively or negatively. We gave questionnaires to one hundred children and their parents. The findings showed that the mother’s level of optimism and the child’s level were very similar. This was true of both sons and daughters. We were surprised at the result that neither the children’s speaking style nor the mother’s style bore any resemblance to the father’s style. This tells us that young children listen to what their primary caretaker (usually the mother) says. If the child has an optimistic mother, this is great, but it can be a disaster for the child if the child has a pessimistic mother.
① the way to improve active listening skills
② the relationship between gender and speaking style
③ the importance of sharing experience in the family
④ the role of questionnaires in psychological research
⑤ the influence of the mother’s speaking style on the child


35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?



The above graph shows how many hybrid and electric vehicle patents the world’s top seven companies got from 2002 to 2008. ①There are four Japanese companies, two US companies, and one South Korean company in the list. ②Two out of the seven companies were each assigned more than one hundred patents from 2002 to 2008. ③Though Company B ranked second during the period from 2002 to 2007, it ranked first in 2008. ④Company F from South Korea ranked sixth during the period from 2002 to 2007, but it ranked fourth in 2008. ⑤Company A was assigned more than six times as many patents as Company F during the period from 2002 to 2007, but the two companies received the same number of patents in the year 2008.
36. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

In fact, the men were unaware that the bill displayed a photo of the king of Thailand.

When their ship landed in Thailand, two US sailors took a tour of Bangkok. (①) As they stopped at a street corner, they saw some paper money on the ground and stepped on it to keep it from blowing away. (②) Seeing it, two uniformed Thai police officers at the same intersection ran to the sailors and arrested them. (③) According to the US officer who arranged to set the sailors free, the sailors had to apologize to the police. (④) The Thais consider him sacred, so stepping on his image is unforgivable and a serious crime. (⑤) To avoid such a problem when you are traveling in Thailand, you should be aware how deeply the people respect the royal family.

37. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
For the past two decades, illustrations in children’s books have become increasingly detailed and obtrusive, while language has become lessened―sometimes to the point of extinction. It is not unusual for a book of thirty or more pages full of repetitive phrases. The artwork is often marvelous, but the pictures make the language redundant, and the children have no need to imagine anything when they read such books. Looking at a picture actively prevents children younger than nine from creating a mental image, and can make it difficult for older children. In order to learn how to read and comprehend, they need to practice making their own meaning in response to text. They need to have their innate powers of imagination trained.
① 읽기와 쓰기 교육은 취학 후 시작해야 한다.
② 아동용 도서에서 그림의 비중을 줄여야 한다.
③ 아동용 도서의 그림은 사실적으로 그려야 한다.
④ 상상력을 키우기 위해 청각적 효과를 사용해야 한다.
⑤ 아동에게 상상력을 자극하는 그림을 많이 보여주어야 한다.

38.Adair Paul Neal에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Adair Paul Neal was usually called “Red Adair.” The nickname “Red” was a natural nickname because of his red hair, and it became his trademark. Born in Houston, Texas in 1915, he grew up in poverty. He dropped out of high school to help support the family. Adair held various jobs including seven years of work in the oil fields before he went into the army. After the war, Adair went to work for a company fighting oil well fires. Fearless, he became famous. He was called out to fires all over the world, including war zones, because of his company’s experience and expertise. Hollywood noticed and based a feature film on Adair’s life starred by John Wayne in 1968. Adair was seventy-nine years old when he finally retired from firefighting in 1994.
① 머리색과 관련된 별명을 갖고 있었다.
② 가정 형편 때문에 고등학교를 중퇴했다.
③ 군 입대 전 유전에서 일한 적이 있다.
④ 전쟁 지역 화재 진압에 참여했다.
⑤ 할리우드 영화에 출연했다.





39.Nepenthes attenboroughii에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
In 2007 scientists discovered a very strange flesh-eating plant. This plant, called Nepenthes attenboroughii, is so large that it can swallow and devour rats whole. They are lured into its slipper-like mouth to drown or die of exhaustion before being slowly dissolved by digestive enzymes. The plant is green and red and has a stem that can grow up to four feet long. It can only be found high up on the windswept slopes of Mount Victoria in the Philippines. After hearing of missionaries who had seen “whole rats” being eaten by the shrub, botanists Stewart McPherson and Alistair Robinson led a team of scientists to the Asian nation and uncovered the rare species. This plant was named after the naturalist broadcaster David Attenborough.
① 쥐가 좋아하는 먹이를 제공한다.
② 소화액으로 먹이를 녹인다.
③ 줄기가 4피트보다 높이 자란다.
④ 필리핀 전역에서 발견된다.
⑤ 발견한 식물학자의 이름을 따서 명명되었다.





[40~41] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
40.While creating a statue, the artist depends on the appropriate lighting to develop the figure because the quality of the final product relies on the interplay between light and shade. So great attention should be paid to lighting when the finished work is displayed. If a light from a source is weaker or stronger than when the work was created, the effect that the sculptor intended may be lost. In painting, the light and shade give the image shape and solidity that cannot be altered by an external light in which it is displayed. When a sculpture is exhibited, however, the artist’s work is brought to life by light, and its character can be altered by the control of the light source.
① 미술 작품에 대한 평가는 시대에 따라 바뀐다.
② 조명을 이용한 설치 예술 작품이 증가하고 있다.
③ 미술 작품을 제작할 때는 빛이 큰 영향을 미친다.
④ 조각품의 손상을 방지하기 위해 촬영을 삼가야 한다.
⑤ 조각품은 제작 당시와 동일한 조명 아래에서 전시해야 한다.
41.Take a liter of rice and pour it all at once through a funnel and into an empty beaker. Note how long it takes. Next, take the same rice and pour it, not all at once, but in a smooth controlled flow and measure how long that process takes. Which liter of rice gets through more quickly? The second method takes nearly one-third less time. What seems slower is actually faster. Likewise, a study conducted at a jammed tunnel showed that when cars were allowed to enter the tunnel in the usual way, with no restrictions, the two-lane tunnel could handle 1,176 cars per hour. But in a trial, the tunnel authorities limited the number of cars that could enter the tunnel every two minutes to 44. The result? The tunnel now handled 1,320 vehicles per hour.
*funnel: 깔때기
① Walking can save time.
② Human nature seeks speed.
③ Freedom brings convenience.
④ Modest control improves efficiency.
⑤ Measuring methods can vary the results.

[42~43] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
42.All top performers know they cannot stand still for long. They always look for ways to improve. Tony Gwynn, the player who won three batting championships, says, “Once you think you’re where you want to be, you’re not there any more.” The greatest challenge we have as we become successful is never to rest on our success, never to feel like we’ve done it. The moment you feel like you’ve done it, that’s the beginning of the end. One of the best basketball players of the 1980s, Larry Bird, is another great example. In his off season, he works to keep improving his skills. One summer, for example, Bird lifted weights; another summer he made a court on his mother’s front lawn, just “to learn some new moves.”
① Ready to Say No?
② Top People Never Stop
③ You Are What You Dream
④ Once Losers, Now Winners
⑤ Sports: Pleasure or Money?

43.People are wrong to regard play as a frill. Marc Bekoff at the University of Colorado, studying play behavior in social animals such as wolves, coyotes, and dogs, concluded that play allows individuals to try out new things because they can make mistakes without penalty. “Play encourages taking reasonable risks,” he says. “It allows you to be flexible and creative.” The search for novelty and the desire for something fresh is a hallmark of the state of play. And of course novelty and freshness are also central to creativity. At the very least, then, we should equip the next generation for the inevitable recessions of the future by encouraging water fights and inviting imaginary friends to join in.
① Be More Playful	② Admit Your Weaknesses
③ Change Your Habits	④ Do Important Things First
⑤ Be Patient with Your Children

44. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

An extraordinary successful and economical example of weed control can be found in Australia. Around 1787, a man brought the prickly pear, a kind of cactus, into Australia.

(A)To eliminate them, Australian scientists were sent to North and South America to study enemies of the prickly pears. After trials of several species, three billion eggs of an Argentine moth were spread in Australia.
(B)Some of the prickly pears escaped from his garden. Having no natural controls in this new territory, they spread immensely, eventually occupying about sixty million acres.
(C)Seven years later, the dense growth of the prickly pear had been destroyed and the once uninhabitable areas reopened to settlement and grazing. The whole operation had cost less than a penny per acre.
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)
③ (B)-(C)-(A)	④ (C)-(A)-(B)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)

45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

The TRI was one of the most successful environment programs in American history. Its original goal was simply to require companies to report their toxic discharges, so that state and federal governments would know about existing practices. But to stimulate extensive reductions, the media placed a spotlight on the worst offenders, leading them to do much better. The worst industrial air toxic polluter in New York City, for example, was subject to an extensive media campaign, one that led to large-scale emissions reductions. Hundreds of local and national articles targeted “the top polluters” in relevant areas. The result was to create a kind of blacklisting. No company wanted to be ranked among the worst, which led to a 45 percent decrease of toxic discharges between 1988 and 1995.

󰀻

   (A)    pressure helped solve    (B)    problems.

	(A)	(B)
① Media	……	environmental
② Media	……	economic
③ Peer	……	economic
④ Consumer	……	cultural
⑤ Consumer	……	environmental
[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)South Pole explorer Ernest Shackleton never reached his goal of crossing Antarctica, but the circumstances that prevented him from reaching that goal pushed him to  achieve an even more amazing feat. In January 1915 Shackleton’s ship Endurance became trapped in ice off Antarctica. He and his crew of twenty-seven lived on the ship trapped in the ice for nine months until they had to abandon their ship when the ice crushed the boat.
(B)In addition, they had to hunt scarce seals and penguins for food, and were attacked by killer whales and sea leopards, which would rise through the ice in search of prey. Throughout this time, Shackleton demonstrated his leadership by rationing food, rotating use of the warmer sleeping bags, and keeping a calm, positive attitude that helped morale. He also showed great courage as he and five of his men crossed eight hundred miles of dangerous ocean to the nearest inhabited island to seek help.
(C)Despite no maps and terrible weather, Shackleton’s small boat reached the island, where Shackleton and an even smaller group organized a rescue party to retrieve the rest of his crew. Despite the perils of living in south polar waters for almost two years, all twenty-seven men eventually came back from the expedition. Shackleton never crossed the South Pole, but he completed the greatest task of bringing back all of his crew alive.
(D)The day the ship sank, Shackleton wrote his new goal: “The task is to reach land with all members of the Expedition.” The group camped on the ice for six months, until the ice broke up and they took small lifeboats to nearby uninhabited Elephant Island. During their time on the ice, boat, and island, Shackleton’s group had to endure temperatures as low as twenty degrees below zero and had no daylight from May to July.

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

47. 위 글의 밑줄 친 an even more amazing feat가 가리키는 내용으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 남극대륙을 최초로 횡단한 것
② 남극의 새로운 지도를 작성한 것
③ 자신의 공로를 탐험대원들에게 돌린 것
④ 탐험대원 전원을 살아서 돌아오게 한 것
⑤ 인간의 거주지를 남극대륙으로 확장한 것
48. 위 글의 Ernest Shackleton에 관한 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 지휘하던 배가 암초에 걸려 좌초했다.
② 대원들의 동물 사냥을 금지했다.
③ 대원들에게 침낭을 돌려가며 사용하도록 했다.
④ 남극대륙에서 대원들과 4년간 거주했다.
⑤ 부서진 배를 수리하여 Elephant 섬으로 갔다.


[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Arun was ten years old. He came from a poor family in India. He kept missing days in his government school. The teacher tried getting him interested in what the class was doing, but he was inattentive. She felt that he had a learning disability.
There was a group near school which helped children after school hours with homework and with revision of the day’s subjects. This ‘evening school’, near the slum where Arun lived, was asked by this teacher if they could spend more time with him and find out why he missed school and was so inattentive. After six months (Arun went regularly to this evening school, never missing a day), the helper there said that Arun assisted his father in repairing bicycles and enjoyed this work. So, the evening school helpers began their program to         the government school education by starting with what Arun knew and liked: bicycles.
From that starting point, he learned about metals, about physics and chemistry, and he learned two languages. He then began to follow the lessons in his government school, and enjoyed studying and learning new things. Arun grew up to do well in his school-leaving examination, and is now at a university learning engineering―his main passion.

49. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① limit	② ignore
③ imitate	④ evaluate
⑤ complement


50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① The Origin of Formal Education in India
② The Importance of Cooperative Learning
③ Revision: The Secret of a Successful Student
④ The Result of Learning with No Competition
⑤ Education Focusing on Individual Learners’ Interests



※확인 사항
  문제지와 답안지의 해당란을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.


1
8
2010학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 사용할 표지판을 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① proud ② jealous ③ curious
④ worried ⑤ nervous
3. 다음을 듣고, 무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오.
① a cartoon ② a brochure ③ a headline
④ an editorial ⑤ a photograph
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to park her car
② to give him a ride
③ to fix the broken bicycle
④ to take his son to a doctor
⑤ to inform him of the repair expenses
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 선물 값으로 여자에게 주어야 할 금액을
고르시오. [3점]
① $18 ② $20 ③ $36 ④ $40 ⑤ $50
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 야생 동물 보호의 중요성을 강조하려고
② 동물 실험 윤리 강화에 대해 홍보하려고
③ 애완 동물 응급 처치 요령을 설명하려고
④ 여름철 애완 동물 관리 방법을 안내하려고
⑤ 동물 애호가 협회에 대한 지원을 촉구하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 친구에게 전화하기 ② 전화번호 알려주기
③ 전화기 수리 맡기기 ④ 휴대전화기 분실신고하기
⑤ 고객에게 메시지 전달하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 정육점 주인 ― 손님 ② 식당 지배인 ― 웨이터
③ 음식점 주인 ― 배달원 ④ 비행기 승무원 ― 승객
⑤ 학교 영양사 ― 조리사
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
① 운동화 빨래방 ② 구두 수선점 ③ 발 전문 병원
④ 기차역 매표소 ⑤ 디자인 학교
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 박물관 방문하기 ② 사진기 찾아오기
③ 도시락 주문하기 ④ 건전지 교환하기
⑤ 아침 식사 준비하기
11. 다음 일정표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 보게 될 경기를
고르시오.
12. 다음을 듣고, Community Service Award에 관한 내용과
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 올해의 시상은 졸업한 선배가 한다.
② 지원 자격은 지역 사회봉사 40시간 이상이다.
③ 자기 자신뿐만 아니라 친구도 추천할 수 있다.
④ 지원서는 학교 홈페이지에서 내려 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 지원서 제출 마감일은 5월 6일이다.
제 3 교시
2 외국어(영어) 영역
2
8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: ____________________________________________ ① Okay. I’ll tell Jane to fill in for you.
② Great! She’d love to take the position.
③ I promise I’ll consider your resignation.
④ Good, but you should withdraw your resignation.
⑤ Thank you. I’ll find someone as soon as possible.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman: _________________________________________ ① Probably not. He needs all the rest he can get.
② I don’t think he can. His plane is arriving soon.
③ No. He didn’t say anything when he left this morning.
④ Of course, he can. He should be at the theater by now.
⑤ He already left to buy flowers for your performance.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: ____________________________________________ ① You need to learn to motivate your students better.
② Please make sure to turn in your homework today.
③ That’s exactly what I need. So how do I join?
④ Welcome. What activities would you like to sign up for?
⑤ My group members have been very cooperative with me.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Michael이 Sam에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Michael: _________________________________________ ① How about joining a health club?
② Lucky you! I wish I could be like you.
③ You look tired. You should stop working out.
④ Be patient. Everyone’s progress is different.
⑤ Do you want to be my workout partner?
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제
지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This started as early as 8000 B.C. During the New
Stone Age as people began to settle into fixed
agricultural communities, this intensified. Originally raised
mainly for their meat, sheep and goats became valuable
also for their milk and wool. Cattle were domesticated
both for meat and skin and as work animals for
agriculture. Their milk production was not a factor until
much later in history when breeding for high milk
production produced suitable cows. Horses were also
domesticated and became important for transportation and
came to play a major part in warfare.
① 축산 ② 조경 ③ 수송 ④ 임업 ⑤ 수렵
19. 밑줄 친 She[she]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? [1점]
A woman stopped at a flower shop to order some flowers to
be wired to her mother who lived 100 miles away. As ①she
got out of her car, she noticed a girl sitting on the street
sobbing. The woman asked the girl what was wrong and she
replied, “I wanted to buy a red rose for my mother, but I only
have 75 cents and a rose costs two dollars.” ②She smiled and
said, “Come on in with me. I’ll buy you a rose for your
mother.” ③ She placed her order of flowers to her mother and
bought a rose for the girl. As they were leaving, she offered
the girl a ride. ④ She responded, “Yes, please, if you could.
Take me to my mother.” The little girl directed her to a
grave and placed the rose on it. This changed the woman’s
plan! ⑤ She returned to the flower shop, canceled the wire
order, picked up a bouquet of fresh roses, and drove 100
miles to meet her mother.
20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Mr. Brown wanted his students to learn math in the
context of real life. He felt it was not enough for them
just to work out problems from a book. To show his
students how math could really help ① them, he held
several contests during the year. The contests allowed his
students ② to have fun while they practiced math and
raised money. Once he filled a fishbowl with marbles,
asked the students to guess how many marbles there
were, and ③ awarded a free lunch to the winner. Another
time they entered a contest to guess how many soda cans
the back of a pickup truck ④ was held. To win, they
had to practice their skills at estimating, multiplying,
dividing, and measuring. They used ⑤ most of the prize
money for an end-of-the-year field trip.
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
It is hard for street trees to survive with only foot-square
holes in the pavement. The average life of a street tree
surrounded by concrete and asphalt (A) is / are seven to
fifteen years. Many factors underground determine if a
street tree will make it. If the soil is so dense that the
roots cannot get in, it will surely die. If they can get in,
there is a better chance of getting the water and nutrients
(B) needing / needed to survive. Another question is whether
adequate water supplies are getting into the growing area.
Some of the water comes from underground sources and
some from rain, and it is hard to measure (C) where / what
the tree is getting it. Of course, if the roots get into the
sewers, they can get everything they need.
(A) (B) (C)
① is …… needing …… where
② is …… needing …… what
③ is …… needed …… where
④ are …… needing …… where
⑤ are …… needed …… what
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
If you lead a busy life and are short of time, you may
find that you are eating a full meal only about once a day.
① From the standpoint of health this is a bad practice. ② You
would be treating your body with more consideration if
you had several small meals instead of a single big one.
③ A given amount of food is used more efficiently by the
body if it is spaced throughout the day rather than eaten at
one sitting. ④ Such symptoms are likely to occur in people
who drink more than five cups of strong black coffee in a
single day. ⑤ People who have large, infrequent meals tend
to gain more weight and to have a higher level of fat in the
blood than do those who eat smaller quantities (but the
same total) at regular intervals.
[23～27] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
23. We push down our feelings because most of us have
been brought up to believe that there are feelings which are
unacceptable. Some of us learned that all emotions are
unacceptable, while others learned that specific emotions
such as anger or crying are unacceptable. In fact, there is
absolutely nothing wrong with any kind of feeling. When
someone tells you not to feel sad or angry, he or she is
asking the impossible. You can deny the feelings you are
having but you cannot stop them from coming. All that
feelings need, in order to pass, is to be acknowledged and
accepted. Just saying to yourself, or someone else, ‘I feel
angry’ (or sad, or frightened) is a great start. Let yourself _________ the feelings, good or bad.
① deny ② hide ③ respect
④ choose ⑤ distinguish
24. Human beings direct their activities toward the
satisfaction of physical wants and general well-being.
They avoid, whenever possible, situations that may bring
about physical deprivation, including pain, hunger, and a
need for sleep. Much contemporary advertising promises
these satisfactions, whether from headache remedies,
fancy foods, or form-fitting mattresses. An individual
can suffer any of these deprivations temporarily, however,
and he may knowingly enter into situations which will
deprive him for a time if he believes that there will be _________________. The willingness of astronauts to
undergo periods of intense training is at least partially
explainable in terms of the great rest that they know will
come at the end of their missions. [3점]
① creative advertising ② physical contact
③ ultimate satisfaction ④ emotional imbalance
⑤ mental illness
25. No matter how we shake or tap the bottle of ketchup,
some of it refuses to come out. In some cases, up to 20
percent of the product is left in the packaging when it
is thrown out. This is not only annoying for consumers
but also poses difficulties when recycling: The leftovers
first have to be removed from the packaging, which is
expensive, time-consuming, and uses a great deal of
water. A German project by the Fraunhofer Institutes,
together with Munich University of Technology and
various industrial partners, will put an end to this dilemma.
Researchers are applying thin films, no more than 20
nanometers thick, to the inside surface of packaging in
order to _____________________. ① keep ketchup fresh ② remove tap water
③ develop nanotechnology ④ reduce leftover traces
⑤ increase the price of ketchup
26. When we have made an error, as for example in
adding up a column of figures, we have a tendency to
repeat it again and again. This phenomenon is known as
the persistent error. The same thing happens when we try
to solve a problem; each time our thoughts take a certain
course, that course is more likely to be followed the next
time. The reason that we keep making the same error
repeatedly is that associations form between the ideas in
the chain of thoughts and become firmer each time they
are used, until finally the connections are so well
established that ___________________________________. Thus, once we have adopted an unprofitable line of
thought, it is harder to adopt a profitable line.
① the chain is very difficult to break
② persistent problems are solved automatically
③ the ideas lose their associations with one another
④ those connections become weaker as time goes by
⑤ the phenomenon will lead to a profitable line of thought
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4
8
27. About three percent of the weight of sea water is accounted
for by salt. The salt content of the ocean is being continually
added to by runoff from the land, but it is not increasing. Yet
salt cannot leave the sea by evaporation because the water
vapor leaves it behind. So for many years it was a mystery as
to why the sea should ________________, given the rate of
runoff, and particularly if the world was supposed to be
hundreds of millions of years old. The riddle was not solved
until the 1970s, when the deep ocean openings were
discovered. Sea water is swallowed up by these cracks in the
ocean bed; when it reemerges, millions of years later, as steam
from volcanoes, the salt has been filtered out of it on its
passage through the rocks.
① be so deep and large
② create so much runoff
③ have so little salt in it
④ have so many volcanoes
⑤ keep its temperature so steady
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
A blind spot is not the same as a simple lack of knowledge.
A blind spot emerges from a (A) resistance / connection to
learning in a particular area. At the root of many of our blind
spots are a number of emotions or attitudes ―fear being the
most obvious, but also pride, self-satisfaction, and anxiety. A
manager, for example, might have unsurpassed knowledge
in the financial field, but her understanding of people
management might be (B) flooded / limited . Her people find
her cold and aloof and want her to become more consultative
and involved with the team. She, however, is not willing to
accept feedback about her management style and refuses to
even consider the (C) prospect / retrospect of changing her
management style.
*
aloof: 냉담한
(A) (B) (C)
① resistance …… limited …… prospect
② resistance …… flooded …… retrospect
③ resistance …… limited …… retrospect
④ connection …… flooded …… prospect
⑤ connection …… limited …… retrospect
29. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I start my long journey with great enthusiasm. The
thought of conquering the mountain stirs me with
anticipation. Although the freezing wind pounds upon me,
I feel flushed with warmth. Just after ten o’clock in the
morning, I finally put my step on the ice-covered peak of
the mountain. A childlike joy spreads through me. I am
the two hundred and ninth person to stand on the summit
of Mount Everest. My heart races as I take in this
glorious moment. The sky is deep blue and cloudless. For
fifteen minutes I cherish the view as the highest person
on earth. I do not feel the tiredness in my legs, for the
journey has been truly worthwhile.
① irritated and nervous ② cold and indifferent
③ anxious and gloomy ④ excited and satisfied
⑤ touched and sympathetic
30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절
하지 않은 것은?
 Downhill Cross-country
The figure above shows the equipment for downhill and
cross-country skiing and their recommended sizes. As you
can see, the downhill ski is ① shorter and wider than the
cross-country ski and is about the height of the skier. The
cross-country ski meets the ② elbow when the arm is held
above the head. In either case, a slightly heavier or more
experienced skier might want a longer ski, and a lighter or
beginning skier might prefer a shorter ski. The cross-country
pole is longer than the one for downhill skiing, and its tip is
③ bent. The length of the cross-country pole reaches the
armpit. The downhill pole fits comfortably in the hand about
two inches ④ below the armpit. The bottom of the downhill
boot attaches completely to the ski, while the ⑤ heel of the
cross-country boot is not fastened to the ski.
* armpit: 겨드랑이
31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Early photography continued the trend toward the
imprisonment of the subject and the object of representation.
During photography’s first decades, exposure times were
quite long. (A) , the daguerreotype process required
exposures of four to seven minutes in the sun and from
twelve to sixty minutes indoors. Early photographs
represented the world as stable, eternal, and unshakable.
And when photography ventured to represent living
things, they had to be immobilized. (B) , portrait
studios universally employed various holding devices to
assure the steadiness of the sitter throughout the lengthy
time of exposure. The devices firmly held the person in
place. In other words, a person who wanted to see his own
image became a voluntary prisoner of the machine.
* daguerreotype: 은판(銀板) 사진술
(A) (B)
① For instance …… Instead
② For instance …… Thus
③ Otherwise …… Thus
④ Otherwise …… Instead
⑤ Otherwise …… However
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
[32～33] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
32. Sometimes all a good cheese needs to stop it from going
bad is a sympathetic ear. Researchers in France have come
up with an ultrasonic sensor that will listen to cheese as it
matures and warn cheese makers of defects. Cheese makers
have to downgrade up to one-fifth of their produce because
of undetected faults. If the new device works well, that
problem could be reduced. The technique involves sending
a low frequency ultrasonic signal through the cheese to a
sensor at the other side. By measuring the change in the
speed and size of the emerging signal, the moisture and
porosity of the cheese can be mapped.
* porosity: 물질의 내부에 작은 구멍이 많은 성질
① 치즈 생산량 감소의 원인 탐색
② 국가별 치즈 생산 방법의 특징
③ 치즈 숙성에 필요한 시간과 습도 조절
④ 치즈 영양 분석을 위한 초음파 이용 방법
⑤ 초음파 감지기를 이용한 치즈의 결함 탐지
33. Nobody likes performance reviews. Employees are
nervous they will hear nothing but criticism, and bosses are
nervous their direct reports will respond defensively. So
people generally keep their mouths shut. That is unfortunate
because most employees need help figuring out how to
improve their performance and advance their careers. Also,
it can be harmful to the company if a lack of clear feedback
leads to undesirable work behaviors. There is a way to avoid
this problem. Managers can help employees learn adaptive
techniques ― like acknowledging negative emotions and
reframing fears and criticisms constructively ― to prevent
destructive responses. Once people are comfortable asking for
feedback, they will begin to see how they are doing relative
to management’s priorities, and their work will be more in
line with organizational goals.
① necessity of a feedback-friendly working environment
② improvement of working conditions for new employees
③ importance of roles of management in employee placement
④ development of upper-level management training programs
⑤ significance of a feedback analysis of the welfare policy
34. 다음 글에서 작곡가에 관한 필자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Composers describe their private world through the use of
sound. Making such a description concrete and detailed
requires not just inspiration but certain practical tools and
skills. No matter what style of music you write, you need to
understand dynamics and speed, the uses of harmony and
rhythm. You also need to know the range and capabilities of
instruments, the possibilities of the human voice, and the
problems of acoustics. You need to be able to devise a
blueprint that communicates to your musicians what it is you
want to hear. A young composer who takes a shortcut in this
technical training in his rush to play the role of a composer
will dry up very fast. If you learn the proper techniques, then
the passion, if it is genuine, will come through.
① 연주자와 의사소통을 자주 해야 한다.
② 전문가로부터 작곡법을 배워야 한다.
③ 예술적 영감을 중요시해야 한다.
④ 악기의 제작 과정을 잘 알아야 한다.
⑤ 실질적인 음악 지식과 기법을 익혀야 한다.
35. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은? [3점]
Technology Use Among Students and Teachers in the U.S.
(%)
Groups
Technology Products
Kindergarten ~ Grade 3
Grades
4 ~ 6
Grades
7 ~ 12 Teachers
Desktop computer 58 60 82 93
Laptop computer 21 28 35 39
Cell phone 39 49 75 60
MP3 player 12 22 46 6
Video game player 53 55 61 3
The above table shows the differences in technology
product use on a weekly basis among grade groups of
students and teachers in the U.S. ① As the students go
up in grade group, the percentage of technology product
use also increases. ② The percentage of desktop computer
use is the highest, immediately followed by that of video
game player use by all three student groups. ③ With
respect to cell phones, 39% of the students in the
kindergarten to grade 3 group use them, whereas 49%
and 75% of the students in the grade 4~6 and 7~12
groups use them, respectively. ④ For desktop and laptop
computer use, the teachers show a higher percentage
than all three student groups. ⑤ The teachers have a
lower percentage of MP3 player and video game player
use than all three student groups.
36. Costa Rica에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Costa Rica means ‘rich coast’ in Spanish. It was
discovered in 1502 and named by Christopher Columbus,
who thought it might be a land rich with gold. However,
Costa Rica has no great mineral wealth. It has, instead,
rich soil and a moderate climate. While other Latin
American nations suffered exploitation from outside the region
and developed societies split by class conflict between
rich and poor, Costa Rica developed an agricultural
economy made up of numerous small farmers. There was
not great wealth, but what there was was spread evenly.
Costa Rica continued its unusual development after it
separated from Spain in 1821, becoming the first Latin
American country to abolish slavery. In 1889 the little
nation held the first free election in Latin America.
① 금을 비롯한 광물자원이 풍부한 나라이다.
② 토양은 비옥하지만 기후는 온화하지 않다.
③ 대규모 농장을 바탕으로 한 농업경제가 발달하였다.
④ 라틴 아메리카에서 노예제도를 폐지한 마지막 국가이다.
⑤ 라틴 아메리카에서 최초로 자유선거를 실시하였다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6
8
37. TLA에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
In the early 1960s, Jill Norris, the mother of two sons with
learning difficulties, began to exchange appropriate toys with
other families; out of this she founded the Toy Libraries
Association (TLA). The association opened toy libraries in
community centers, clinics, schools, public libraries, and
hospitals around the world. From these toy libraries parents
and children could borrow toys knowing that they have been
thoroughly tried and tested, not only for their play value but
also for safety. Over the years, the association has involved
leading professional educators and therapists, alongside
parents, in the production of numerous publications on specific
toys and aspects of play. In its early years, the association was
opposed by the toy industry because it was likely to reduce
sales of toys as children were borrowing them.
① 다른 가족과의 장난감 교환을 계기로 시작되었다.
② 세계 곳곳의 병원에 장난감 도서관을 세웠다.
③ 장난감 도서관의 장난감은 안전성 시험을 받았다.
④ 출판물 제작에 교육 전문가를 참여시켰다.
⑤ 초기에 장난감 업계로부터 환영을 받았다.
[38～39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. Clients send a steady stream of clues and messages through
their facial expression, body movement, and voice pitch.
Counselors need to learn how to read these messages without
distorting or overinterpreting them in order to establish and
maintain relationships with their clients. For instance, when
Denise says to Jennie, “It seems that it’s hard for you to talk
about yourself,” Jennie says, “No, I don’t mind at all.” But the
real answer is probably in her nonverbal behavior, for she
speaks hesitatingly while looking away and frowning. Reading
such clues helps Denise understand Jennie better. Our
nonverbal behavior has a way of ‘leaking’ messages about
what we really mean. The unplanned nature of nonverbal
behavior contributes to this leakage even in the case of highly
defensive clients.
① 상담가는 의뢰인과의 상담 기록을 잘 보관해야 한다.
② 상담가는 의뢰인의 대인 관계에 주의를 기울여야 한다.
③ 상담가는 의뢰인의 개인 정보를 유출하지 않아야 한다.
④ 상담가는 의뢰인의 비언어적 표현을 바르게 파악해야 한다.
⑤ 상담가는 의뢰인과의 신뢰 형성을 기본 원칙으로 해야 한다.
39. Sweeping statements have been made about the effect of
clothing on the behavior of a child. It has been said that a
child who is better dressed is better behaved, and that a child
who is dressed like a cowboy is louder than he is when
dressed in ordinary clothes. Clothing, however, might have a
temporary effect on the behavior of the child, but not a lasting
effect. That is, we would predict that a child who was dressed
in his best clothes and whose mother stressed that they were ‘best’ would be better behaved for a short period, but by the
end of the hour the child would have forgotten his clothes and
would be acting as he would in old clothes. Likewise, the child
who is dressed in a cowboy outfit might be very noisy while
playing cowboys for a brief time, but he might soon change
to another activity and be no more noisy than usual.
① 아이들은 활동하기에 적합한 옷을 선호한다.
② 어려서부터 단정한 복장을 습관화해야 한다.
③ 화려한 의상은 아이들의 행동을 제약한다.
④ 엄마의 취향이 자녀들의 옷 선택에 영향을 준다.
⑤ 옷이 아이들의 행동에 미치는 영향은 일시적이다.
40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
Due to this trade, the plant variety became widespread
in a region.
For thousands of years, farmers at harvest time have
selected seeds, cuttings, or tubers from superior plants to
save for the next planting. ( ① ) Farmers often protected the
stored seeds from insects or animals by sealing them in clay
pots or burying them in baskets covered with ash. ( ② )
They also often stored tubers in cold areas and either
replanted cuttings immediately or kept them dry until the
next planting time. ( ③ ) Farmers thus saved their genetic
stocks from season to season. ( ④ ) They could exchange
remaining stocks with neighbors or exchange them in the
local market. ( ⑤ ) Organized seed production, however, did
not begin until the early 1900s.
* tuber: (감자 등의) 덩이줄기
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. A study found that enrollment in physical education
classes was not related to academic achievement scores,
but involvement in vigorous physical activity was. Students
who engaged in vigorous activity outside of school at least
20 minutes per day, three days per week, were found to
have higher academic scores. Students in the physical
education class spent an average of only 19 minutes out of
a 55-minute class engaged in moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity. Given that this amount and intensity of activity in
physical education classes had no correlation to students’ academic achievement, whereas there was a significant
association between academic achievement and vigorous
activity outside of school, the researchers propose that there
may be a certain minimum level of activity necessary to
produce the potentially desirable effects.
* enrollment: 등록
① Intense Physical Activity: Healthy or Not?
② Physical Activity Levels and Academic Achievement
③ Academic Achievement and Amount of Study Time
④ How to Increase Enrollment in Physical Education
⑤ Student Health and In-class Physical Education
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
42. The tragic heroes in Shakespeare’s plays have free
will. They possess their own defects of character that
bring their downfalls. Macbeth is ambitious but weak;
Othello is jealous; Hamlet cannot make up his mind ― but
all three might have made themselves into better human
beings. Nothing outside themselves prevents them from
taking the right path as opposed to the wrong, or tragic,
path. On the other hand, for the heroes in Greek
tragedies where fate embodied in the oracles prevails,
there is no free will. The gods control a man’s destiny,
and one cannot fight the gods. Regardless of their
strength or wisdom, the heroes cannot control their own
future. That is why the heroes in Greek tragedies can be
compared to fish in the net.
* oracle: 신탁(神託)
① Types of Heroes in Shakespearean Tragedies
② Lack of Moral Messages in Western Tragedies
③ Influence of Greek Tragedies on Shakespearean Plays
④ Conflict Between Gods and Heroes in Greek Tragedies
⑤ Difference Between Shakespearean and Greek Tragic Heroes
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we look at the world and ourselves, we do it
through a set of filters. Think about what a filter is. A
filter is a mechanism that lets some things flow in but
screens other things out.
(A) Through them, we process and assign a weight and
meaning to every event in our lives. Some things
flow in, others are screened out, but everything is
affected: not just what we ‘see,’ but what we ‘hear’ and ‘believe.’
(B) Depending on what the filter is made up of, it can
also alter whatever is looked at or passes through it.
Sunglasses are a good example of a visual filter.
(C) But, obviously, I am not talking here about some
physical apparatus that we can put on and take off,
like a pair of glasses. In fact, the filters I am
mentioning are internal, mental, emotional, verbal,
and perceptual in nature.
① (A) - (B) - (C) ② (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (A) - (C) ④ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The descriptions of sound production have been
rewritten in this edition so as to update the theory on
which they were based and to provide better practical
advice regarding pronunciation problems. Several figures
have been redrawn in order to achieve greater accuracy
and clearer detail. The authors have tried to eliminate
traces of gender-biased attitudes wherever they were
detected, and a definite attempt has been made to balance
female and male references. The most significant kind of
change in the new edition, however, is the result of the
effort we have made to introduce more use of language
for real communicative purposes in the learning activities
suggested for students to carry out.
① 개정판의 주요 변화를 설명하려고
② 새로운 언어 학습법을 제시하려고
③ 새 책의 출판 일정을 안내하려고
④ 새로운 편집 규정을 통보하려고
⑤ 최근의 발음 이론을 소개하려고
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The introduction of the player piano in the United States
at the turn of the 20th century had been accompanied
by fairly critical comments. Player pianos produced
music mechanically through a set of instructions stored
on a music roll. Although proponents of the player piano
such as piano manufacturers and publishers of sheet
music thought that it would lead to ‘an almost universal
music education,’ many music teachers, musicians, and
composers opposed it. Opponents claimed that one could
copy sound, but not interpretation, and that mechanical
instruments reduced the expression of music to
mathematical systems. For this reason, they believed that
mechanized music lessened the ideal of beauty by ‘producing the same after same, with no soul, no joy, no
passion,’ and that the introduction of the player piano
would lead to the disappearance of amateur players.
* proponent: 옹호자

While some believed that the player piano would
provide a universal music education, others criticized its
(A) music from a(n) (B) viewpoint.
(A) (B)
① recorded …… economical
② repetitive …… commercial
③ harmonious …… conservative
④ mechanized …… artistic
⑤ artificial …… political
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8
8
[46∼48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Several years ago, we were asked to help with the
merger of two community volunteer groups, who wanted
to join together in order to establish an agency that
would have more influence and better financing than the
two separate agencies of the past. Both were rural
groups, which had traditionally and geographically been
separated by a range of mountains.
(B)
In leading the planning meetings of the two boards, he
carefully kept the groups focused on the long-range issues,
and convinced them not to look at the headquarters
question until the very end of the process. Once the
organizational structure was set, by-laws agreed upon,
and all the volunteers had actually merged, then the
headquarters site was decided on ― logically and easily,
as it turned out.
(C)
We worked with the two groups to help them set goals,
develop policy, and build an organizational structure.
Meanwhile, the young executive director, who saw a
successful merger as his primary responsibility, was
especially careful about one thing. On either side of the
mountain was a large town. Each of the former agencies
had its own board, a separate staff, and long-standing
regional ties. The executive director understood that the
question of where the new joint agency’s headquarters
would be was an important question as well as a potentially
explosive one.
(D)
By then everyone was so committed to the organization
and its goals that the headquarters question had become a
relatively unimportant, routine one. The executive director
of the merging agencies was primarily concerned about
the long-range good of the organization and the total
community. He used all his influence and persuasive
powers to make that a common focus, and the results
were successful.
46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
① (B) - (C) - (D) ② (B) - (D) - (C) ③ (C) - (B) - (D)
④ (D) - (B) - (C) ⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
47. 위 글 (C)의 밑줄 친 one thing이 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한
것은?
① 경제적인 지원 ② 본부 위치의 결정
③ 이사회의 회칙 제정 ④ 산간 지역의 개발
⑤ 직원들의 책임감 고취
48. 위 글이 시사하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 기업의 성장은 지역사회 발전에 도움을 준다.
② 조직의 화합을 위해 동호회를 활성화해야 한다.
③ 장기적 관점에서 본질적 문제 해결에 집중해야 한다.
④ 의사 결정을 할 때 소수의 의견을 존중해야 한다.
⑤ 개인의 잠재력 계발에는 인내가 필요하다.
[49∼50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
It was spring and some 6th grade boys at a suburban
elementary school were fooling around on the
playground. They had discovered a great new trick. One
of them would kneel down behind someone and the
other would push the person over. The trick worked
perfectly with (a) Anna. She fell over with ease. She
was hurt and crying. In the process (b) she had broken
her wrist. The yard duty staff sent the shaken boys to
the principal.
The principal began by saying that she understood that
they were playing and had not meant to cause serious
harm, but that, in fact, they had. She explained that the
girl would have to wear a cast for weeks and now lots
of ordinary things would be more difficult for (c) her. She pointed out that the girl played the flute and would
now not be able to play in the spring concert. By the time
(d) she finished, the boys were in tears and very sorry
for what they had done. The principal also suspended
the boys for a day, explaining to them that even though
she knew they were sorry and had not meant to cause
such harm, she believed suspension was necessary to
signal to everyone in the community the seriousness of
the situation. On their own, the boys brought (e) the girl
flowers and apologized for hurting her.
*
suspend: 정학시키다
49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Taking Responsibility for Your Actions
② Respecting Students’ Privacy
③ Importance of Self-respect
④ Roles of Family in Childhood
⑤ Negative Consequences of Suspension
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1 8
2011학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
 1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 연필깎이를 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① nervous ② frightened ③ envious
④ bored ⑤ furious
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 다양한 발성법 훈련의 필요성
② 신체 구조와 목소리의 관련성
③ 운동 전 근육 스트레칭의 장점
④ 노래하기 전 발성 연습의 중요성
⑤ 체력 단련이 발성에 미치는 효과
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수업 교재 찾기 ② 친구와 토론하기
③ 책상 정리 정돈하기 ④ 문자 메시지 보내기
⑤ 급우 만나 사과하기
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 받을 거스름돈의 액수를 고르시오.
① $2.00 ② $4.00 ③ $5.00
④ $6.00 ⑤ $9.00
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 말하는 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 엘리베이터 점검 지연을 사과하려고
② 주차 위반 차량에 대해 주의를 주려고
③ 지하 주차장의 차량 이동을 요청하려고
④ 지하 주차장 보수 공사에 대해 안내하려고
⑤ 지하 주차장 물청소 시간 변경을 알리려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① to go on a business trip
② to talk to the supervisor
③ to email his check-up results
④ to pick up the medical documents
⑤ to send the documents via regular mail
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
① 호텔 ② 독서실 ③ 레스토랑
④ 공항 환전소 ⑤ 전자 제품 매장
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 직장 상사 - 비서 ② 매표소 직원 - 관람객
③ 회의 진행자 - 토론자 ④ 관광 안내원 - 관광객
⑤ 항공기 승무원 - 탑승객
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 보고서 작성하기 ② 생일 선물 추천하기
③ 쇼핑 정보 제공하기 ④ 상품 가격 문의하기
⑤ 백화점 신용카드 찾기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 장소를
고르시오.
12. 어느 대학이 개설할 도자기 강좌에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 미술학과에서 제공하는 것이다.
② 초급반, 중급반, 고급반으로 구성된다.
③ 도자기 강의 경력이 5년 이상인 강사가 가르친다.
④ 학생들은 수료 후 도자기 전시회에 참여할 수 있다.
⑤ 재학생의 경우 재료비만 내면 수강할 수 있다.
제 3 교시
①
②
③
④
⑤2 외국어(영어) 영역
2 8
13. 다음 그림 속의 두 사람의 대화로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
①②③④⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
M: ______________________________________________
① You’d better go to see a doctor.
② We should check the lost and found.
③ You will take the jacket off sooner or later.
④ Let’s see if there is a store that sells jackets.
⑤ We should go buy a bigger suitcase right now.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
M: ______________________________________________
① Come on! Learning is more important than grades.
② I enjoyed your lecture. I’d like to take your class again.
③ That’s wonderful! Thank you for signing up for the class.
④ Right. I need to reconsider whether I should take her class.
⑤ I’m sorry about your grades. You can do better next time.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
W: ______________________________________________
① Will you be paying by cash or charge?
② Would you like me to gift-wrap your album?
③ Can you make a couple of copies of this document?
④ Could you wish your father a happy birthday for me?
⑤ Do you want me to check if our main store has one?
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Yumi가 교수에게 할 말로 가장 적
절한 것을 고르시오.
Yumi: ___________________________________________
① Could you tell me what I did wrong in the examination?
② Is it possible for me to take the exam on another day?
③ I wish my team had done better in the dance competition.
④ If you give me a chance, I promise to win the grand prize.
⑤ How can I become a member of the college dance team?
 이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
I was pleased to receive your letter requesting a letter of
reference for a Future Leaders scholarship. As your physics
teacher, I can certainly speak highly of your academic
abilities. Your grades have consistently been A’s and B’s
in my class. Since this is the first semester that I have had
you in class, however, I do not feel that I am the right
person to provide information on your leadership skills. I
would encourage you to request a reference letter from
those teachers with whom you have had the most
opportunity to demonstrate those skills. I am sure many
teachers would be willing to provide letters for you. Good
luck with your scholarship.
① 장학금 추천서 부탁을 거절하려고
② 뛰어난 학업 성취를 칭찬하려고
③ 물리학 강좌 수강을 안내하려고
④ 장학금 수혜 소식을 알려주려고
⑤ 장학금 신청을 권유하려고
19. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
There was a girl who grew flowers in New Jersey and
sometimes took flowers to customers on Staten Island. To get
there, ① she had to go over a bridge paying a toll of $2.50.
One day, as she was approaching the toll booth, she saw a
toll booth attendant who reminded ② her of her mother. As
she reached in ③ her pocket, she found she had no money
but a half dollar. Not knowing what to do, ④ she handed the
coin to her and asked nervously, “Want to buy a fresh red
rose?” The attendant looked surprised at first, but glancing
at the cars piling up behind her, she took two dollars from
her purse and rang it up on the cash register. “Yes, I’ll take
it,” ⑤ she said with a smile. “And I suppose the price is two
dollars even, right?”
20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
The phrase, ‘jack-of-all-trades’ is a ① shortened version
of ‘jack of all trades and master of none.’ It refers to those
who ② claim to be proficient at countless tasks, but cannot
perform a single one of them well. The phrase was first
used in England at the start of the Industrial Revolution. A
large number of efficiency experts set up shop in London,
③ advertising themselves as knowledgeable about every
type of new manufacturing process, trade, and business. For
a substantial fee, they would impart their knowledge to their
clients. But it soon became ④ evident that their knowledge
was limited and of no practical value. Doubtful industrialists
started calling these self-appointed experts ‘jacks of all
trades and masters of none.’ These experts are still with us,
and as a result so ⑤ does the phrase.
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3 8
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
Mr. Potter was sailing for Europe on one of the greatest
transatlantic ocean liners. When he went on board, he found
(A) another / other passenger was to share the cabin with
him. After going to see the accommodations, he came up to
the purser’s desk and inquired (B) if / that he could leave
his valuables in the ship’s safe. Mr. Potter explained that
ordinarily he never availed himself of that privilege, but he
had been to his cabin and had met the man who was to
occupy the other bed. Judging from his appearance, he
was afraid that he might not be a very trustworthy person.
The purser accepted the responsibility for the valuables and
(C) remarking / remarked, “It’s all right. I’ll be very glad to
take care of them for you. The other man has been up here
and left his valuables for the same reason!”
* purser: 선박의 사무장
 (A) (B) (C)
① another …… that …… remarking
② another …… if …… remarked
③ another …… if …… remarking
④ other …… if …… remarked
⑤ other …… that …… remarked
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Geothermal heat, generated inside the Earth, helps keep the
temperature of the ground at a depth of several meters at a
nearly constant temperature of about 10°C to 20°C. ① This
constant temperature can be used to cool and heat buildings
by using a heat pump. ② A heat pump contains a water-filled
loop of pipe, which is buried to a depth where the temperature
is nearly constant. ③ In summer, warm water from the
building is pumped through the pipe down into the ground,
since the underground temperature is lower than the air
temperature. ④ However, far more use is made of geothermal
energy for direct heat than any other source of energy. ⑤ The
water cools and then is pumped back to the building where
it absorbs more heat, and the cycle is repeated.
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Comparing yourself with others is natural and can be
motivational. However, too much of it leads to envy,
especially if you’re ungenerous toward yourself. Instead, try
measuring your present self against your past self. When I
asked a salesperson to map his sales performance, he was
amazed to see that he had achieved a 5% to 10% annual
increase in sales while at his firm. This made him feel more
self-confident and lessened his resentment toward his
colleagues. If you feel threatened every time a perceived
rival does well, remind yourself of your own strengths and
successes.
① 타인의 장점을 인정하자.
② 결과보다는 과정에 충실하자.
③ 타인을 통해 자신을 돌아보자.
④ 자신의 능력과 장점에 초점을 맞추자.
⑤ 자신의 감정을 통제하는 능력을 기르자.
24. 다음 글에 드러난 Michael의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Michael dared to look inside the window, but from the
deep shadow of the trees and the gloom within, he could not
clearly make out the objects within. Although every nerve in
his body cautioned otherwise, he slowly pushed open the
door. The door creaked as it swung back. As he carefully
took a step inside, the door slammed shut. Michael’s futile
attempts to open the door only increased his panic. He tried
to calm his thundering heart by repeating to himself, “I am
not afraid. I am not afraid,” but to no avail. He suddenly felt
an uneasy darkness consume him from within. He opened
his mouth to call for help, but his words failed him.
① sympathetic ② weary ③ horrified
④ disappointed ⑤ gloomy
[25～30] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
25. Errors and failures typically corrupt all human designs.
Indeed, the failure of a single component of your car’s engine
could force you to call for a tow truck. Similarly, a tiny
wiring error in your computer’s circuits can mean throwing
the whole computer out. Natural systems are different,
though. Throughout Earth’s history, an estimated 3 million
to 100 million species have disappeared, which means that
this year somewhere between three and a hundred species
will vanish. However, such natural extinctions appear to
cause little harm. Over millions of years the ecosystem has
developed an amazing ___________ to errors and failures,
surviving even such drastic events as the impact of the
Yucatan meteorite, which killed tens of thousands of species.
* meteorite: 운석
① connection ② intolerance ③ insensitivity
④ accessibility ⑤ subjectivity
26. Unlike deviance in other settings, deviance in sports often
involves ___________________ norms and expectations.
For example, most North Americans see playing football as
a positive activity. Young men are encouraged to ‘be all
they can be’ as football players and to live by slogans such
as “There is no ‘I’ in t-e-a-m.” They are encouraged to
increase their weight and strength, so that they can play
more effectively and contribute to the success of their
teams. When young men go too far in their acceptance of
expectations to become bigger and stronger, when they are
so committed to playing football and improving their skills
on the field that they use muscle-building drugs, they become
deviant. This type of ‘overdoing-it-deviance’ is dangerous,
but it is grounded in completely different social dynamics
from the dynamics that occur in the ‘antisocial deviance’
enacted by alienated young people who reject commonly
accepted rules and expectations.
① a disciplined control of the desire to avoid
② wasted efforts and resources in establishing
③ ambitious attempts to get independent of and free from
④ a traditional approach of matching slogans and mottos with
⑤ an unquestioned acceptance of and extreme conformity to
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4 8
27. Time pressure leads to frustration, and when we are frustrated
or experience other negative emotions, our thinking becomes
narrower and less creative. However, people are unaware of
this phenomenon and live under the illusion that when they
are experiencing time pressure, they are also more creative.
This explains why time pressure is pervasive and to some
extent accounts for the increase in rates of depression. We are
generally too busy trying to squeeze more and more activities
into less and less time. Consequently, we fail to enjoy potential
sources of happiness that may be all around us. To enjoy the
richness that life has to offer, ________________________.
① we need to take our time
② we should maximize our opportunities
③ we have to deal with depression wisely
④ it is necessary to explore some creative ideas
⑤ it is important to embrace even negative emotions
28. With no attempt there can be no failure and with no
failure no humiliation. So our self-esteem in this world
depends entirely on what we back ourselves to be and do.
It is determined by the ratio of our actualities to our supposed
potentialities. Thus, ________________________________.
This illustrates how every rise in our levels of expectation
entails a rise in the dangers of humiliation. What we
understand to be normal is critical in determining our chances
of happiness. It also hints at two ways for raising our
self-esteem. On the one hand, we may try to achieve more;
and on the other, we may reduce the number of things we
want to achieve. The advantages of the latter approach lie in
the following statement: To give up pretensions is as blessed
a relief as to get them gratified. [3점]
① the higher your expectations are, the more you will achieve
② self-esteem can be increased by lowering actualities
③ success divided by pretensions equals self-esteem
④ early failures in life may lead to happiness later in life
⑤ more supposed potentialities increase chances of happiness
29. For many people ‘nature’ is defined as a negative: It exists
where people do not. Nature lies outside the urban and
agricultural realms, in regions of Earth where natural
processes are unhindered. Nature is where fallen logs rot and
acorns grow, wildfires turn woodlands into meadows, and
barrier islands shift with the currents ― all without human
interference. By extension, this definition suggests that nature
is best protected by keeping humans far away, so that it can
continue to run itself. But there is a serious problem with this
view. If nature is defined as a landscape uninfluenced by
humankind, then __________________________. Prehistoric
peoples changed their surrounding ecosystems, whether by
installing orchards in the Amazon or by hunting many large
mammals to extinction in North America. And modern
humans are changing the global environment even more
profoundly, whether through planet-wide climate change, or
by the worldwide movement of synthetic chemicals through
the food chain.
① humans cannot exist without nature
② there is no nature on the planet at all
③ it deserves to be preserved at all costs
④ modern people owe much to their ancestors
⑤ humans are at the mercy of the forces of nature
30. The most obvious salient feature of moral agents is a
capacity for rational thought. This is an uncontested necessary
condition for any form of moral agency, since we all
accept that people who are incapable of reasoned thought
cannot be held morally responsible for their actions.
However, if we move beyond this uncontroversial salient
feature of moral agents, then the most salient feature of
actual flesh-and-blood (as opposed to ridiculously idealized)
individual moral agents is surely the fact that every moral
agent __________________________________ every moral
problem situation. That is, there is no one-size-fits-all answer
to the question “What are the basic ways in which moral
agents wish to affect others?” Rather, moral agents wish to
affect ‘others’ in different ways depending upon who these
‘others’ are.
① brings multiple perspectives to bear on
② seeks an uncontroversial cure-all solution to
③ follows the inevitable fate of becoming idealized in
④ comes with prejudices when assessing the features of
⑤ sacrifices moral values to avoid being held responsible for
31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
When it comes to food choices, young people are
particularly (A) vulnerable / immune to peer influences. A
teenage girl may eat nothing but a lettuce salad for lunch,
even though she will become hungry later, because that is
what her friends are eating. A slim boy who hopes to make
the wrestling team may routinely overload his plate with foods
that are (B) dense / deficient in carbohydrates and proteins to
‘bulk up’ like the wrestlers of his school. An overweight teen
may eat (C) greedily / moderately while around his friends
but then devour huge portions when alone. Few young
people are completely free of food-related pressures from
peers, whether or not these pressures are imposed intentionally.
* carbohydrate: 탄수화물
 (A) (B) (C)
① vulnerable …… dense …… greedily
② vulnerable …… dense …… moderately
③ vulnerable …… deficient …… greedily
④ immune …… deficient …… moderately
⑤ immune …… dense …… greedily
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
It is said that although people laugh in the same way, they
don’t necessarily laugh at the same things. If this is true of a
single community, it is even more true of people who live in
different societies, because the topics that people find amusing,
and the occasions that are regarded as ①appropriate for joking,
can vary enormously from one society to the next. Some styles
of humor with silly actions are guaranteed to raise a laugh
everywhere. But because of their reliance on shared assumptions,
most jokes travel very ②well. This is particularly ③noticeable
in the case of jokes that involve a play on words. They are
difficult, and in some cases virtually ④ impossible to translate
into other languages. Therefore, this is why people’s attempts
to tell jokes to ⑤foreigners are so often met with blank stares.
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5 8
33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many grocery stores give the shopper the option of paper
or plastic grocery bags. Many people instinctively say that
paper is less harmful to the environment ― after all, paper is
biodegradable and recyclable. (A) , most plastic is
manufactured using oil by-products and natural gas. Plastic
is not always easily or economically recyclable, and once
manufactured, plastic may last virtually indefinitely. Yet in the
United States, paper products are the single largest component
of municipal waste. Even though paper products may
theoretically be biodegradable, in most landfills, they do
not biodegrade. (B) , paper production emits air
pollution, specifically 70 percent more pollution than the
production of plastic bags. And consider that making paper uses
trees that could be absorbing carbon dioxide. The paper bag
making process also results in three times more water pollutants
than making plastic bags.
 (A) (B)
① In contrast …… Furthermore
② In contrast …… However
③ As a result …… Likewise
④ For instance …… Nonetheless
⑤ For instance …… Therefore
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. While predictions about the future are always difficult,
one can be made with certainty. People will find themselves
in large numbers of interactions where intercultural
communication skills will be essential. There are several
reasons for such prediction. Some reasons include increasing
amounts of contact brought on by overseas assignments in
the business world, the movement of college students
spending time in other countries, and increasing amounts of
international travel among tourists. Others relate to social
changes within any one large and complex nation: affirmative
action, the movement of immigrants and refugees, bilingual
education programs, and movement away from the goal that
ethnic minorities become a part of a ‘melting pot.’ Therefore,
it is essential that people research the cultures and
communication conventions of those whom they propose to
meet in the future.
* affirmative action: 소수민족 차별 철폐 조치
① predictions of social changes in other countries
② necessity of understanding intercultural communication
③ importance of good educators in a multicultural nation
④ limitations of communication conventions across cultures
⑤ methods of intercultural communication in the business world
35. A famous psychiatrist was leading a symposium on the
methods of getting patients to open up about themselves. The
psychiatrist challenged his colleagues with a boast: “I’ll bet
that my technique will enable me to get a new patient to talk
about the most private things during the first session without
my having to ask a question.” What was his magic formula?
Simply this: He began the session by revealing to the patient
something personal about himself ― secrets with which the
patient might damage the doctor by breaking the confidence.
As he was ‘maskless,’ patients began to talk about their lives.
They opened themselves up to him because he had become
an open-minded person himself, and openness evoked
openness. The same principle applies to all human relationships.
If you dare to take the initiative in self-revelation, the other
person is much more likely to reveal secrets to you.
① being frank with patients with serious illness
② opening up oneself to draw out the other person
③ need of confidentiality between doctors and patients
④ effects of a new treatment on psychological problems
⑤ rebuilding broken relationships between close acquaintances
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Familiarity of Five Social Media
The bar graph above shows the familiarity of the
respondents with five prominent social media in 2007 and
2008. ① According to the graph, the social media that was
the most familiar in 2007 was blogging. ② In the following
year, social networking became the most familiar social
media. ③ Video blogging, which was the least familiar social
media in 2007, showed the biggest increase in familiarity
among the three media that showed an increase from 2007
to 2008. ④ Wikis showed a bigger decrease in familiarity
than podcasting from 2007 to 2008. ⑤ In 2008, podcasting
and wikis were the least familiar social media.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6 8
37. 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
During the early 1980s, a team of Italian scientists carried
out a series of studies under a variety of circumstances on
the ticklishness of people. The researchers found that
people seem to have one foot that is more ticklish than the
other ― and for most people it is the right. The experiment
was repeated in 1998 using a special way that a pointed
nylon rod was stroked across the bottom of the foot three
times at intervals of a second. After applying it to thirty-four
people, the researchers confirmed the original finding and
pushed back the frontiers of knowledge still further by
showing that males were more ticklish than females. One
suggested explanation is that the left side of the brain,
which detects stimuli applied to the right foot, is associated
with positive emotions such as laughter.
① 1980년대 말에 이탈리아 과학자들이 간지럼에 대해 연구하였다.
② 양쪽 발이 똑같이 간지럼을 타는 것으로 나타났다.
③ 나일론 봉으로 무릎을 쓰다듬는 방식으로 실험이 재연되었다.
④ 여자가 남자보다 간지럼을 더 많이 타는 것으로 밝혀졌다.
⑤ 왼쪽 뇌가 긍정적 감정과 연관된다는 설명이 제시되었다.
38. Buffon에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Buffon was a famous zoologist and botanist during the
reign of the French monarch Louis ⅩⅥ. Buffon stocked the
park at Versailles with wild animals. He also expanded the
botanical garden on the Left Bank in Paris. And with the
confidence that goes with being a great collector, he began
writing a comprehensive natural history of the world. In
that work, Buffon expressed the biased opinion that native
animals of the New World are smaller than those of
Europe, that there are fewer species of animals in America,
and that even domesticated species of European animals
diminished in size and vigor upon crossing the Atlantic.
Obviously, his opinions were not well-received and were
severely criticized in America.
① Louis ⅩⅥ가 통치할 때의 동물학자이자 식물학자였다.
② Paris의 Left Bank에 있는 식물원을 확장했다.
③ 세계 자연사에 관한 글을 집필하기 시작했다.
④ America의 동물 종(種)이 Europe보다 많다는 견해를 표명했다.
⑤ 그의 견해들은 America에서 비판을 받았다.
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. After an event, all one has are memories of it. Because
most waits expect a desired outcome, it is the memory of the
outcome that dominates, not the intermediate components. If
the overall outcome is pleasurable enough, any unpleasantness
suffered along the way is minimized. Terence Mitchell and
Leigh Thompson call this ‘rosy retrospection.’ Mitchell and
his colleagues studied participants in a 12-day tour of Europe,
students going home for Thanksgiving vacation and a
three-week bicycle tour across California. In all of these cases,
the results were similar. Before an event, people looked
forward with positive anticipation. Afterward, they remembered
fondly. During? Well, reality seldom lives up to expectations,
so plenty of things go wrong. As memory takes over, however,
the unpleasantness fades and the good parts remain, perhaps
to intensify, and even get amplified beyond reality.
① 여행과 축제는 인생을 풍요롭게 하는 촉매제이다.
② 현실을 도외시한 예측은 부정적인 결과를 초래한다.
③ 바람직한 결과를 기대하면 현실의 어려움은 최소화된다.
④ 결과가 좋으면 나쁜 기억은 최소화되고 좋은 기억은 강화된다.
⑤ 기쁨을 얻기 위해 겪는 고통은 미래를 위한 투자가 될 수 있다.
40. Every day, it seems, we learn of an apology from a
prominent figure in response to an indiscretion of some sort.
Those in the public eye have an unfortunate tendency to
apologize only after they have been found with a hand in the
cookie jar. When this happens, it is only natural for a
skeptical public to wonder, “Are they apologizing for their
conduct, or simply because they were caught?” To make
matters worse, the wrongdoer will often use the passive voice
in his or her apology: “Mistakes were made,” rather than, “I
made a mistake.” It is more comfortable to use the passive
voice here, but doing so relinquishes any sense of personal
responsibility. It is a non-apology and is not very meaningful.
* relinquish: 저버리다
① 대중은 사회 문제에 민감하게 반응한다.
② 저명인사들은 자선 활동에 앞장서야 한다.
③ 대중은 지도자의 과실을 감시할 필요가 있다.
④ 저명인사는 실수를 저지르지 않도록 노력해야 한다.
⑤ 저명인사들의 책임 회피성 사과는 진정한 사과가 아니다.
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. We can infer that there was prosperity in ancient Athens
because this was a time that saw the planting of many olive
trees. Since olive trees do not produce their fruits for about
thirty years, their planting indicates that people were
optimistic about the future. The growth in the export of olive
oil also encouraged the development of pottery, in which the
oil was transported. About 535 B.C. came the invention of
red-figure vase painting. Now the whole surface of the vase
was blackened, with figures picked out in the natural red.
This allowed much more variety and realism. And the
prosperity brought about by the international trade in olive
oil spread to the peasants and it was their rituals, with choral
song and mimic dancing, that formed the basis of early
theater.
① Ancient Greece and Its Rich History
② What Olive Planting Brought to Athens
③ Olive Oil and Its Many Wondrous Uses
④ The Olive Tree: Key to Early Greek Theater
⑤ Ancient Athens: Center of International Trade
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7 8
42. Until recently, it was generally assumed that the first
humans took a northerly route to leave the African continent,
walking into the Middle East and then spreading out from
there. However, mtDNA analysis now suggests the exodus
may have proceeded via a more southerly route. In 2005, an
international team of researchers announced that an isolated
group living in Malaysia appeared to be the descendants of
humans who left Africa around 65,000 years ago. According
to the researchers, climatic change underway at the time
would have made a southerly route easier. The genetic
evidence suggests perhaps as few as several hundred
individuals went first to India, then Southeast Asia and
Australasia. If correct, this would explain why humans
appear to have reached Australia around 50,000 years ago,
while the oldest human remains in Europe ― a jawbone
found in Romania ― are only around 35,000 years old.
* mtDNA: 미토콘드리아 DNA
① Out of Africa: Which Way?
② Are Asians the First Humans?
③ How Reliable is mtDNA Analysis?
④ Climatic Change in Ancient Africa
⑤ Genetic Evolution of Human Beings
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Even worse than reaching a conclusion with just a
little evidence is the fallacy of reaching a conclusion
without any evidence at all. Sometimes people mistake
a separate event for a cause-and-effect relationship.
(A) You therefore leap to the conclusion that the man in
the black jacket has robbed the bank. However, such a
leap tends to land far from the truth of the matter. You
have absolutely no evidence ― only a suspicion based
on coincidence. This is a post hoc fallacy.
(B) They see that ‘A’ happened before ‘B’, so they
mistakenly assume that ‘A’ caused ‘B’. This is an error
known in logic as a post hoc fallacy.
(C) For example, suppose you see a man in a black jacket
hurry into a bank. You notice that he is nervously
carrying his briefcase, and a few moments later you
hear a siren.
① (A) - (B) - (C) ② (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (A) - (C) ④ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
The clanhouse usually consists of a room adjoining
the dwelling of the senior female member of the clan.
Hopi religion features a ritual calendar that includes a
large number of annually required ceremonies. In most cases,
each ceremony is ‘owned’ by the members of a certain clan.
( ① ) Every clan represented in a village has a clanhouse
in which the masks and other sacred items used in the
ceremonies are kept when not in use. ( ② ) This woman is
in charge of storing ritual equipment and of seeing to it
that they are treated with the proper respect. ( ③ ) There
is also a male head of each clan whose duties likewise are
partly religious because he is in charge of the performance
of ceremonies owned by his clan. ( ④ ) A male clan
head passes his position down to either his younger brother
or his sister’s son. ( ⑤ ) In this way, culturally important
ritual knowledge is kept within the clan.
* clan: 씨족
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The information processing model emphasizes rational
analysis for solving problems, with an emphasis on
techniques for quickly arriving at a solution. Culturally, this
orientation fits well with the kinds of mental attributes which
are normally valued by contemporary Western societies. For
example, Westerners tend to admire someone who is
independent and quick-thinking. But these characteristics are
not universally valued. Agricultural African societies, for
example, valued looking at the problem in the context of the
whole society, noting its impact on various features of life.
In most situations, speed in arriving at a solution was not a
vital issue. This is also found with the Cree and Ojibway in
Canada. These groups historically lived in wilderness areas
and faced many hardships; in these circumstances, they
would rarely get a second chance at solving problems.
Consequently, these Native people value taking time to
reflect on a problem and mentally walk through possible
solutions before any action is taken.
󰀻
In modern Western societies, (A) is highly
valued in problem-solving, whereas it is viewed
differently in some non-Western societies due to their
(B) .
 (A) (B)
① speed …… religious beliefs
② speed …… technical advances
③ speed …… cultural backgrounds
④ deliberation …… mental attributes
⑤ deliberation …… living conditions
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8 8
[46～47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The other day an acquaintance of mine, a sociable and
charming man, told me he had found himself unexpectedly
‘alone’ in New York for an hour or two between appointments.
He went to the Whitney Museum and spent the ‘empty’
time looking at things by himself. For him it proved to be
a shock nearly as great as falling in love to discover that
he could enjoy himself so much alone.
What had he been afraid of? I asked myself. That,
suddenly alone, he would discover that he bored himself,
or that there was, quite simply, no self there to meet? But
having taken the first step into this new world, he is now
about to begin a new adventure; he is about to be launched
into his own inner space, space as immense, unexplored,
and sometimes frightening as outer space to the astronaut.
His every perception will come to him with a new freshness
and, for a time, seem startlingly __________. For anyone
who can see things for himself with a naked eye becomes,
for a moment or two, something of a genius. With another
human being present vision becomes double vision, inevitably.
We are busy wondering, what does my companion see or
think of this, and what do I think of it? The original impact
gets lost.
“Music I heard with you was more than music.” Exactly.
And therefore music ‘itself’ can only be heard alone. Solitude
is the salt of personhood. It brings out the authentic flavor
of every experience.
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Finding Oneself through Solitude
② Coping with Loneliness in a City
③ The Path to Gaining Double Vision
④ An Unexpected Journey into Museums
⑤ Leisure vs. Work: Maintaining the Balance
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① problematic ② confusing ③ original
④ universal ⑤ similar
[48～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
My grandmother’s kitchen was overflowing with food.
She raised her daughters to keep an extra box and bottle
unopened in the cupboard for every bottle and box that was
in use. Although she died before I was born, I was raised
by her eldest daughter to do this same thing. Absentminded
as I am, I often find I have accumulated two or even three
extras of anything in my house.
(B)
Befriending life is not always about having things your
own way. Life is impermanent and full of broken eggs. But
what is true of eggs is even more true of pain and loss and
suffering. Certain things are too important to be wasted.
When I was sixteen, just after the doctor came and informed
me that I had a disease that no one knew how to cure, my
mother had reminded me of this.
(C)
But this abundance did not mean that things were to be
wasted. Everything was always used to the full. Even the
tea bags were used twice. There is a family story told about
my grandmother’s refrigerator. Her refrigerator was always
full to the very edges and every shelf was put to use.
Occasionally when someone, usually a child, opened it
without sufficient caution, an egg would fall out and break
on the kitchen floor. My grandmother’s response was always
the same. She would look at the broken egg with satisfaction.
“Aha,” she would say, “today we have a sponge cake!”
(D)
I had turned toward her in shock, but she did not cuddle
or soothe. Instead she reached out and took me by the hand.
“We will make a sponge cake,” she told me firmly. It has taken
many years to find the recipe, the one that is my own, but
I knew in that moment that this was what I needed to do.
* cuddle: 꼭 껴안다
48. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D) ③ (C) - (D) - (B)
④ (D) - (B) - (C) ⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
49. 주어진 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 나는 할머니가 돌아가신 후에 태어났다.
② 의사는 내가 불치병에 걸렸다고 알려 주었다.
③ 할머니의 냉장고는 항상 가득 차 있었다.
④ 할머니는 깨진 계란을 불만스럽게 바라보곤 하셨다.
⑤ 어머니가 손을 내밀어 나의 손을 잡아 주셨다.
50. 주어진 글의 밑줄 친 “We will make a sponge cake”의
문맥상 의미로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 매사에 신중하고 침착하게 행동하자.
② 건강한 신체는 행복한 삶의 원천이다.
③ 화목한 가정 생활은 무엇보다 소중하다.
④ 어려움을 긍정적으로 수용하고 극복하자.
⑤ 성격이 원만해야 타인과의 충돌을 피할 수 있다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 자전거를 고르시오.
①②③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① scared ② delighted ③ encouraged
④ annoyed ⑤ sympathetic
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 연령에 따른 성격의 변화
② 나쁜 잠버릇을 고치는 방법
③ 타고난 기질이 안 바뀌는 이유
④ 수면 자세와 성격 간의 관련성
⑤ 혈액형과 성격 간의 연관 가능성
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 세차 도와주기 ② 버스 기사에게 전화하기
③ 휴대전화 수리 맡기기 ④ 터미널 휴게실 청소하기
⑤ 차량 운행 시간 알려 주기
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문한 물건 값으로 한 달에 지불할 금액을
고르시오. [3점]
① $ 60 ② $ 120 ③ $ 250 ④ $ 360 ⑤ $ 400
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 음식물 보관 방법을 설명하려고
② 기금 마련 바자회를 홍보하려고
③ 학생들의 기부 참여를 독려하려고
④ 피자 파티의 일정 변경을 알리려고
⑤ 양로원 자원 봉사 활동을 안내하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to repair his broken computer
② to install an ad blocking program
③ to place a pop-up ad on a website
④ to help him block spam text messages
⑤ to let him know the name of a program
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
① 농구 경기장 ② 권투 시합장 ③ 빙상 경기장
④ 실내 수영장 ⑤ 육상 경기장
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 은행 직원 ― 고객
② 의사 ― 간호사
③ 경찰관 ― 보행자
④ 아파트 경비원 ― 방문객
⑤ 매표소 직원 ― 관람객
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 꽃 사러 가기 ② 놀이공원 가기
③ 졸업식 참석하기 ④ 쇼핑몰 구경하기
⑤ 전자사전 구입하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 방문할 박물관을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
12. The Walk of Harmony에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 4월 10일 토요일에 개최될 예정이다.
② 다문화 가정에 대한 인식을 높이기 위한 행사이다.
③ 비가 올 경우에는 행사가 취소된다.
④ 8세 미만의 아동은 어른이 꼭 동반해야 한다.
⑤ 참가 신청서는 웹 사이트에서 내려 받을 수 있다.
제 3 교시 홀수형
2 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
2 8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① I’m here to buy a suit for my concert.
② I’ll tell you who’s available by tomorrow.
③ I hope you’re feeling better from the flu.
④ I think we should put on the show right now.
⑤ I want to thank you for finding a replacement.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I’m not interested in those club activities.
② This rock concert is sure to be a big success.
③ My dream is to be the world chess champion.
④ That’s a great way to play musical instruments.
⑤ If you make them, I’ll help you post them up.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Don’t fix what isn’t broken.
② I’d move mountains for you.
③ It’s better to be safe than sorry.
④ You can’t please the whole world.
⑤ Time flies when you’re having fun.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Amy가 택시 기사에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Amy:
① Could you let me off here?
② Does this taxi go to N Seoul Tower?
③ Is there a shortcut to Gyeongbokgung?
④ How long does it take to get to the market?
⑤ Can you recommend a place to visit in Seoul?
 이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
My wife and I have enjoyed receiving your publication
for years. Unfortunately, our jobs now have us both traveling
most weeks, and we simply cannot keep up with a daily
paper. So we would like to request that you stop delivery
to our home. If you have questions about this matter, please
leave a message at (212) 555-5612, and either my wife or
I will call you back as soon as we can. Thank you for
years of reliable delivery of a first-rate newspaper. If our
situation changes, we will call you to resume delivery. In
the meantime, we will expect delivery to stop no later than
the end of this week.
① 여행 동행 제안을 거절하려고
② 신문 배달 중단을 요청하려고
③ 출판 일정에 대해 문의하려고
④ 변경된 전화번호를 안내하려고
⑤ 신속한 정정 보도에 감사하려고
19. 밑줄 친 she [her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Kate and Joan, who had not seen each other for three
months, were chatting happily in Joan’s apartment. After
a short conversation, Joan went to prepare coffee. Soon
① she came back with the cups and saucers and put them
down on a small side table. While Joan was looking for
a tablecloth, Kate was wandering around the room looking
at the pictures on the walls. Intent on one of the pictures,
② she took a step back and hit the small table, tipping it
over. All the cups and saucers were broken. Kate felt
guilty for ③ her negligence. As she helped Joan clean up,
④ she tried to think of a way to compensate her for the
damage. Later, Joan mentioned that she was looking for
volunteers to work in a fair she was organizing. Although
Kate had something important to do on that particular
Sunday, she decided to cancel ⑤ her plans and volunteer
to help Joan.
20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
The word ‘courage’ takes on added meaning if you keep in
mind that it is derived from the Latin word ‘cor’ ① meaning
‘heart.’ The dictionary defines courage as a ‘quality which
enables one to pursue a right course of action, through
② which one may provoke disapproval, hostility, or contempt.’
Over 300 years ago La Rochefoucauld went a step further
when he said: “Perfect courage is to do unwitnessed what
we should be capable of doing before all men.” It is not
easy ③ to show moral courage in the face of either
indifference or opposition. But persons who are daring in
taking a wholehearted stand for truth often ④ achieving
results that surpass their expectations. On the other hand,
halfhearted individuals are seldom distinguished for courage
even when it involves ⑤ their own welfare. To be courageous
under all circumstances requires strong determination.
* provoke: 유발하다
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 3
3 8
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
We anticipate the future as if we found it too slow in
coming and we were trying to hurry it up. (A) So / Such
imprudent are we that we wander about in times that
are not ours and do not think of the one that belongs
to us. We try to support the present with the future
and (B) think / thinking of arranging things we cannot
control, for a time we have no certainty of reaching.
Examine your thoughts, and you will find them wholly
(C) to occupy / occupied with the past or the future. We
almost never think of the present, and if we do so, it is
only to shed light on our plans for the future. The past
and the present are our means; only the future is our end.
(A) (B) (C)
① So …… thinking …… occupied
② So …… think …… to occupy
③ So …… think …… occupied
④ Such …… thinking …… occupied
⑤ Such …… thinking …… to occupy
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Consider the following implication involving the role of
social bonds and affection among group members. If strong
bonds make even a single dissent less likely, the performance
of groups and institutions will be impaired. ① A study of
investment clubs showed that the worst-performing clubs
were built on affective ties and were primarily social, while
the best-performing clubs limited social connections and
focused on making money. ② Dissent was far more frequent
in the high-performing clubs. ③ The low performers usually
voted unanimously, with little open debate. ④ As illustrated
in the study, the high performers placed more importance on
social bonds than the low performers, resulting in their high
rate of success. ⑤ The central problem is that the voters in
low-performing groups were trying to build social cohesion
rather than to produce the highest returns.
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
I have always taught my children that politeness, learning,
and order are good things, and that something good is to be
desired and developed for its own sake. But at school they
learned, and very quickly, that children earn Nature Trail
tickets for running the quarter-mile track during lunch
recess. Or Lincoln Dollars for picking up trash on the
playground or for helping a young child find the bathroom
― deeds that used to be called ‘good citizenship.’ Why is
it necessary to buy the minimal cooperation of children with
rewards and treats? What disturbs me is the idea that good
behavior must be reinforced with incentives. Children must
be taught to perform good deeds for their own sake, not in
order to receive stickers, stars, and candy bars.
① 남을 배려하는 마음을 갖도록 아이들을 가르쳐야 한다.
② 아이들이 서로 협력할 수 있도록 분위기를 조성해야 한다.
③ 잘못된 행동을 할지라도 아이들을 무조건 혼내지 말아야 한다.
④ 아이들이 보상 없이도 바람직한 행동을 하도록 가르쳐야 한다.
⑤ 아이들이 바른 시민으로 성장할 수 있도록 모범을 보여야 한다.
[24～29] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. In a classic set of studies over a ten-year period, biologist
Gerald Wilkinson found that, when vampire bats return to
their communal nests from a successful night’s foraging, they
frequently vomit blood and share it with other nest-mates,
including even non-relatives. The reason, it turns out, is that
blood-sharing greatly improves each bat’s chances of survival.
A bat that fails to feed for two nights is likely to die.
Wilkinson showed that the blood donors are typically sharing
their surpluses and, in so doing, are saving unsuccessful
foragers that are close to starvation. So the costs are
relatively low and the benefits are relatively high. Since no
bat can be certain of success on any given night, it is likely
that the donor will itself eventually need help from some
nest-mate. In effect, the vampire bats have created a kind
of . * forage: 먹이를 찾아다니다
① complex social hierarchy ② ecological diversity
③ mutual insurance system ④ parasitic relationship
⑤ effective reproduction process
25. One of the little understood paradoxes in communication
is that the more difficult the word, the shorter the
explanation. The more meaning you can pack into a single
word, the fewer words are needed to get the idea across. Big
words are resented by persons who don’t understand them
and, of course, very often they are used to confuse and
impress rather than clarify. But this is not the fault of
language; it is the arrogance of the individual who misuses
the tools of communication. The best reason for acquiring a
large vocabulary is that . A genuinely
educated person can express himself tersely and trimly. For
example, if you don’t know, or use, the word ‘imbricate,’
you have to say to someone, ‘having the edges overlapping
in a regular arrangement like tiles on a roof, scales on a
fish, or sepals on a plant.’ More than 20 words to say what
can be said in one.
① it keeps you from being long-winded
② you can avoid critical misunderstandings
③ it enables you to hide your true intentions
④ it makes you express yourself more impressively
⑤ you can use an easy word instead of a difficult one
26. So far as you are wholly concentrated on bringing about
a certain result, clearly the quicker and easier it is brought
about the better. Your resolve to secure a sufficiency of
food for yourself and your family will induce you to spend
weary days in tilling the ground and tending livestock; but
if Nature provided food and meat in abundance ready for
the table, you would thank Nature for sparing you much
labor and consider yourself so much the better off. An
executed purpose, in short, is a transaction in which the time
and energy spent on the execution are balanced against the
resulting assets, and the ideal case is one in which
. Purpose, then, justifies the
efforts it exacts only conditionally, by their fruits. [3점]
① demand exceeds supply, resulting in greater returns
② life becomes fruitful with our endless pursuit of dreams
③ the time and energy are limitless and assets are abundant
④ Nature does not reward those who do not exert efforts
⑤ the former approximates to zero and the latter to infinity
4 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
4 8
27. Psychologist Solomon Asch wanted to discover whether
people’s tendency to agree with their peers was stronger
than their tendency toward independent thought and rational
judgment. Asch assembled groups of twelve university
students and announced that they were taking part in an
experiment on visual perception. He showed them three line
segments, and asked each one in turn which line was the
longest. It was an easy task and the correct answer was
obvious. However, Asch had secretly instructed all but the
last person in each group, who was the real subject of the
experiment, to say that the medium-length line was the
longest. As it turned out, over 70 percent of the real subjects
 and said that the medium-length
line was the longest.
① caved in to group pressure
② figured out the correct answer
③ had problems with their vision
④ roped the other group members in
⑤ used rational judgment in their decision-making
28. Journeys are the midwives of thought. Few places are
more conducive to internal conversations than a moving plane,
ship, or train. There is an almost peculiar correlation between
what is in front of our eyes and the thoughts we are able to
have in our heads: large thoughts at times requiring large
views, new thoughts new places. Introspective reflections
which are liable to stall are helped along by the flow of the
landscape. The mind when thinking
is all it is supposed to do. The task can be as paralyzing as
having to tell a joke or mimic an accent on demand. Thinking
improves when parts of the mind are given other tasks, are
charged with listening to music or following a line of trees.
① may be reluctant to think properly
② may focus better on future thoughts
③ can become confused by multitasking
④ is likely to be paralyzed by fear of new tasks
⑤ can be distracted from what is before the eyes
29. It is a fundamental mistake to imagine that when we see
the non-value in a value or the untruth in a truth, the value
or the truth ceases to exist. It has only become relative.
Everything human is relative, because everything rests on
an inner polarity; for everything is a phenomenon of energy.
Energy necessarily depends on a pre-existing polarity, without
which there could be no energy. There must always be high
and low, hot and cold, etc., so that the equilibrating
process ― which is energy ― can take place. Therefore the
tendency to deny all previous values in favor of their
opposites is just . And in so
far as it is a question of rejecting universally accepted and
indubitable values, the result is a fatal loss. [3점]
① another way of pursuing relativeness in human affairs
② as desirable as the tendency to accept all those values
③ as much of an exaggeration as the earlier onesidedness
④ the one and only way of approaching the ultimate truth
⑤ to admit the presence of energy derived from an inner polarity
30. 다음 글에 드러난 Jess의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Jess took another step forward. The ground fell with
unexpected sharpness, and the water level seemed to jump
from her knees to her waist. She stopped for a moment and
anxiously scanned the river before her. Her legs started to
shake and she felt her body stiffen. And this was an
unknown river. There could be reeds, or other dangers she
didn’t know about. She was concerned that as a townie,
she’d had little experience of the countryside, and none at
all of swimming in rivers. It didn’t look safe enough but she
didn’t want to turn back. She took a deep breath and pushed
herself into the water. It felt nice and cool, not as freezing
as when she had first stepped into it. The water seemed to
welcome and embrace her. She liked the clean, luxuriant
feeling as she swept down with the current.
① bored → amused ② worried → pleased
③ joyous → terrified ④ excited → sorrowful
⑤ afraid → disappointed
31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Contrary to what we usually believe, the best moments in
our lives are not the passive, receptive, relaxing times ―
although such experiences can also be enjoyable, if we have
worked hard to (A) attain / avoid them. The best moments
usually occur when a person’s body or mind is stretched to
its limits in a voluntary effort to accomplish something
difficult and worthwhile. (B) Optimal / Minimal experience
is thus something that we make happen. For a child, it could
be placing with trembling fingers the last block on a tower she
has built, higher than any she has built so far; for a sprinter,
it could be trying to beat his own record; for a violinist,
mastering an (C) uncomplicated / intricate musical passage.
For each person there are thousands of opportunities, challenges
to expand ourselves.
(A) (B) (C)
① attain …… Minimal …… uncomplicated
② attain …… Optimal …… intricate
③ attain …… Optimal …… uncomplicated
④ avoid …… Optimal …… intricate
⑤ avoid …… Minimal …… uncomplicated
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Many people take numerous photos while traveling or on
vacation or during significant life celebrations to ① preserve
the experience for the future. But the role of photographer
may actually detract from their ② delight in the present
moment. I know a father who devoted himself earnestly to
photographing the birth of his first and only child. The
photos were beautiful but, he ③ lamented afterward he felt
that he had missed out on the most important first moment
of his son’s life. Looking through the camera lens made him
④ detached from the scene. He was just an observer, not an
experiencer. Teach yourself to use your camera in a way
that ⑤ neglects your ongoing experiences, by truly looking
at things and noticing what is beautiful and meaningful.
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 5
5 8
33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
No matter how good your product is, remember that
perfection of an existing product is not necessarily the best
investment one can make. (A) , the Erie Canal, which
took four years to build, was regarded as the height of
efficiency in its day. What its builders had not considered
was that the advent of the railroad would assure the canal’s
instant downfall. By the time the canal was finished, the
railroad had been established as the fittest technology for
transportation. (B) , when the fuel cell becomes the
automotive engine of choice, the car companies focusing on
increasing the efficiency of the internal combustion engine
may find themselves left behind. Is it time to keep making
what you are making? Or is it time to create a new niche?
Innovation requires noticing signals outside the company
itself: signals in the community, the environment, and the
world at large. * niche: 틈새
(A) (B)
① Furthermore …… Nevertheless
② Furthermore …… Otherwise
③ For example …… Likewise
④ For example …… However
⑤ In contrast …… Besides
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. Experienced writers invariably write in a climate of
discussion. Their writing is usually embedded in a context
of others’ ideas and opinions. Many writers, especially in
the academic community, are directly responding to other
writers ―a scientist reexamining the experimental procedures
of other scientists; a literary critic taking exception to a
prevailing method of interpretation; a sociologist offering
an alternative explanation of a colleague’s data; a historian
participating as respondent in a conference. Such people
are not writing in a vacuum. Their ideas often originate in
discussion, their writing is a response to discussion, and
their papers are designed to stimulate further discussion.
① the use of discussion in writing
② the need for self-criticism in writing
③ advantages of critical thinking on writing
④ research methods in scientific experiments
⑤ types of persuasive techniques in academic fields
35. Habitat diversity refers to the variety of places where
life exists. Each habitat is the home of numerous species,
most of which depend on that habitat. When it disappears,
a vast number of species disappear as well. More often, an
entire habitat does not completely disappear but instead is
reduced gradually until only small patches remain. This
has happened to old-growth forests and coastal wetlands in
the United States and is now occurring in tropical forests
throughout the world. Elimination of all but small patches of
habitat is especially damaging because it not only eliminates
many local species but also threatens those species that
depend on vast acreage for their survival.
① effects of habitat reduction on climate change
② the shrinkage of habitats and its consequences
③ the importance of forests and coastal wetlands
④ the relationship between types of habitats and species
⑤ ways to preserve natural habitats for endangered species
36. 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Around 350 B.C. there lived in Greece a very famous
painter named Apelles. It was his practice to conceal
himself at previews of his paintings in order to hear the
public’s opinions of his masterpieces. At one such preview
a bootmaker criticized the shoes in a painting on which
Apelles had labored long and hard. After correcting the
picture the painter arranged a second preview. This time
the bootmaker began to criticize the anatomy of one of the
characters. Apelles was unable to restrain himself, for he
knew that the criticism was unjust and the man knew
nothing about anatomy. From his hiding place Apelles
shouted, “Bootmaker, stick to your last!” From that time it
has been the custom to ridicule the people who act like
they know what they do not with the pointed caution,
“Stick to your last!”
① 기원전 350년경 그리스에 Apelles라는 무명의 화가가 살았다.
② Apelles는 시연회에서 대중의 의견을 듣지 않으려고 하였다.
③ 구두장이는 Apelles의 작품에 그려진 신발을 칭찬했다.
④ Apelles는 그림을 수정한 후 다시 시연회를 마련했다.
⑤ Apelles는 구두장이의 해부학적 지식이 풍부함을 인정했다.
37. bristlecone pines에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
Bristlecone pines are unusual trees that grow in the
mountain regions of western America, sometimes as high
as two or more miles above sea level. They grow very
slowly and range from 15 to 40 feet in height. These
evergreens often live for thousands of years. Considering
the habitat of these trees, such as rocky areas where the soil
is poor and precipitation is slight, it seems almost incredible
that they should live so long or even survive at all. The
environmental adversities, however, actually contribute to
their longevity. Cells that are produced as a result of these
conditions are densely arranged. The densely structured
wood is resistant to invasion by insects and other potential
pests. Bristlecone pines grow faster in richer conditions,
but die earlier and soon decay. The harshness of their
surroundings, then, is a vital factor in making them strong
and sturdy.
① 해발 2마일 이상 되는 곳에서 자라기도 한다.
② 높이는 15피트에서 40피트 사이이다.
③ 상록수로서 종종 수천 년 동안 산다.
④ 조직이 조밀하여 해충의 침입에 저항력이 있다.
⑤ 보다 나은 환경에서는 더 빨리 자라고 더 오래 산다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
6 8
38. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentage of children from
birth to 5 years of age by gender diagnosed with asthma
in rural and urban areas in Canada for the 2000-2001,
2002-2003, and 2004-2005 periods. ① For both rural and
urban areas, the percentages of male children diagnosed
with asthma were higher than those of female children for
all the periods. ② During all the periods, the percentages
of male children with asthma were higher in urban areas
than in rural areas. ③ Regarding female children with
asthma, the lowest percentage in urban areas was greater
than the highest percentage in rural areas. ④ In urban
areas, the percentage of male children with asthma in the
2004-2005 period was lower than that of male children
with asthma in the 2000-2001 period. ⑤ In rural areas,
the percentages of female children with asthma were the
same in the 2002-2003 period and the 2004-2005 period.
* asthma: 천식
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. Most people attack a new problem by relying heavily
on the tools and skills that are most familiar to them.
While this approach can work well for problems that are
similar to those previously solved, it often fails, and fails
miserably, when a new problem is particularly novel. In
this circumstance, it is best to assume nothing and treat
the problem as if you have never seen anything like it
before. In martial arts, this sense of looking freshly at
something is known as ‘beginner’s mind.’ Beginners to any
art don’t know what is important and what is irrelevant, so
they try to absorb every detail. Experienced martial artists
use their experience as a filter to separate the essential
from the irrelevant. When that filter mistakenly screens
out something essential, then even seasoned masters can
make mistakes.
① 고도의 기술을 연마할 때 진지한 태도를 지녀야 한다.
② 실수를 거울삼아 자신의 발전을 도모하는 것이 필요하다.
③ 이미 해결된 문제도 열린 마음으로 다시 볼 필요가 있다.
④ 직관보다는 경험에 의존하여 문제를 해결하는 것이 중요하다.
⑤ 새로운 문제는 초심자의 시각으로 접근하는 것이 바람직하다.
40. You see the world as one big contest, where everyone
is competing against everybody else. You feel that there is
a set amount of good and bad fortune out there. You believe
that there is no way that everyone can have everything.
When other people fail, you feel there’s a better chance
for you to succeed. However, there is not a limited supply
of resources out there. When one person wins, everyone
wins. Every victory one person makes is a breakthrough
for all. Whenever an Olympic swimmer sets a new world
record, it inspires others to bring out the best within them
and go beyond that achievement to set new records of
human performance. Whenever a geneticist unlocks new
secrets of the DNA molecule, it adds to our knowledge base
and enables us to better the human condition. Remember
that life is a game where there are multiple winners.
① 경쟁심은 기록 경신의 원동력이다.
② 인생은 예상치 못한 변수로 가득하다.
③ 성공하는 사람들은 성취동기가 분명하다.
④ 자원이 한정된 세상에서 경쟁은 불가피하다.
⑤ 한 사람의 성공은 다른 사람들에게도 이롭다.
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. University students in several of my seminar classes sat
in a circle and each student took turns telling the others
his or her name. At the end of the round of introductions,
the students were asked to write down the names of as
many other students as they could remember. In almost
every case, students wrote down the names of students
that were seated far away from them. However, surprisingly,
they weren’t able to recall the names of students who were
seated close to them. This effect was worst for the students
who sat on either side of them. What was the reason for
such findings? The student who was next in line for an
introduction was clearly on edge and after finishing his or
her introduction, he or she was preoccupied with calming
his or her nerves. The effect was clearly due to the social
anxiety they experienced immediately before and after having
to introduce themselves to the entire group.
① Ways to Cope with Nervousness
② Useful Strategies for Better Memory
③ How to Remember Uncommon Names
④ Nervousness and Its Effects on Memory
⑤ Seating Arrangements for Better Relations
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 7
7 8
42. Richard Dawkins and John Krebs argued that although
in some circumstances it might be appropriate to describe
animal signals as transferring information, in many other,
perhaps most, cases there would be such a conflict of
interest between signaller and receiver that it is more accurate
to describe the signaller as attempting to ‘manipulate’ the
receiver rather than just inform it. For example, an angler
fish that dangles a worm-like bit of skin in front of a small
fish and catches it because the smaller fish snaps at the
‘worm’ can certainly be said to have carried out a successful
manipulation of its prey. In this case, if information has
been transferred, it is most definitely false.
* dangle: 매달다
① Are Smaller Fishes Smarter?
② Talking Animals: Fact or Myth?
③ Cooperation in the Animal World
④ Manipulation: Tricking the Signaller
⑤ Animal Messages: Not What They Seem
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
The body has been viewed as a ‘natural’ phenomenon
― a fixed, unchanging fact of nature. Recently, however,
it is also being seen as a part of culture in the sense
that it can be socially defined in different ways.
(A) It has also opened up new questions and issues in the
sociology of sport. Some people in the sociology of
sport are now working with colleagues in other
disciplines who share interests in the body.
(B) Social definitions of the body are grounded in social
relations and influenced by those with the power to
promote agreement about what should be considered
‘natural’ when it comes to the body. This new way of
thinking about the body has challenged the traditional
mind-body split that has characterized Western thought
since the time of Plato.
(C) In their work they are asking critical questions about
how the body is trained, disciplined, and manipulated in
sports and how some sport scientists are using technology
to probe, monitor, test, evaluate, and rehabilitate the
body as a performance machine.
① (A) - (B) - (C) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
However, recent success in the packaged-cookie market
suggests that these may not be the only, or perhaps
even the most important, reasons.
Why eat a cookie? Some reasons might be to satisfy
your hunger, to increase your sugar level, or just to have
something to chew on. ( ① ) It appears that cookie-producing
companies are becoming aware of some other influences
and, as a result, are delivering to the market products
resulting from their awareness. ( ② ) These relatively new
product offerings are usually referred to as ‘soft’ or ‘chewy’
cookies, to distinguish them from the more typical crunchy
varieties. ( ③ ) Why all the fuss over their introduction?
( ④ ) Apparently much of their appeal has to do with
childhood memories of sitting on the back steps devouring
those melt-in-your-mouth cookies that were delivered by
Mom straight from the oven, while they were still soft.
( ⑤ ) This emotional and sensory appeal of soft cookies is
apparently at least as strong as are the physical cravings
that the product satisfies.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Unlike the modern society, the primitive society has
less specialized knowledge to transmit, and since its way
of life is enacted before the eyes of all, it has no need
to create a separate institution of education such as the
school. Instead, the child acquires the heritage of his
culture by observing and imitating adults in such activities
as rituals, hunts, festivals, cultivation, and harvesting.
As a result, there is little or none of that alienation of
young from old so marked in modern industrial societies.
A further reason for this alienation in modern societies
is that in his conception of reality the modern adult owes
less to his direct experience and more to the experience
of his culture than does primitive man. Clearly, his debt
to culture will vary with the nature of his education.
Hence, the contemporary child must travel much further
than the offspring of primitive man to acquire the world
view of his elders. He is, therefore, that much more
removed from the adults of his society.
󰀻
Unlike the primitive child who learns from his (A)
surroundings, the modern child learns in educational
institutions, which results in (B) from his elders.
(A) (B)
① foreign …… interference
② immediate …… sympathy
③ foreign …… sympathy
④ imaginary …… alienation
⑤ immediate …… alienation
8 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
8 8
[46～47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Many people believe that it is critical to share similar, if
not identical, beliefs and values with someone with whom
they have a relationship. While this may seem preferable, it
is far from mandatory. Individuals from extremely diverse
backgrounds have learned to overlook their differences and
live harmonious, loving lives together. I’ve seen people
from opposite ends of the spectrum economically and
politically that ended up in happy, lasting marriages. I’ve
seen couples from different ethnic groups merge into
harmonious relationships, and I’ve seen people from
different religions come together for a strong, lasting bond.
Furthermore, many good friends have little in common
except a warm loving feeling of respect and rapport.
That’s the only essential thing.
People who enjoy the best relationships with others, who
live life with the least frustration regarding their differences,
have learned that differences are to be expected, a fact of
life. This understanding must go beyond a mere intellectual
‘I know we’re all different.’ You must truly own this idea
and incorporate it into your daily life.
The way I see it, we have only two realistic choices.
We can the principle of separate realities and
remain frustrated and angry over the fact that no one
seems to conform to our way of thinking, or we can
strive to understand what in Eastern philosophy is called
‘the way of things.’ Separate realities is the way things
really are. Everyone is unique and has different gifts to
offer. When we look for these gifts we will surely find
them ― and in doing so, we will open the door to a world
of personal growth. * rapport: 친밀한(공감적인) 관계
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Facing Challenges in Life
② Leading an Intellectual Life
③ Finding Meaning in Friendship
④ Accepting Differences in Others
⑤ Enriching Life through Meditation
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① resist ② establish ③ master
④ grasp ⑤ overestimate
[48～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
After several futile attempts to teach the role of theme,
or the prominent repeated melody, in classical music, the
teacher was at wit’s end. Having reminded her students
many times that composers like Wagner depended on the
listeners’ remembering the earlier theme to recognize its
later use, (a) she was determined to make her students
understand that themes recur throughout a piece.
(B)
She knew that her class had little trouble with simple
variations and could easily identify themes that were
repeated in a similar way. But when the theme showed
much variation, the students’ attention focused on the new
detail to such an extent that they no longer ‘heard’ the
basic theme. For a week or two, the teacher worried about
the problem. Other teachers advised (b) her to go on with
something else, but she continued to search for a solution.
(C)
The following day in class, (c) she asked how many
students had tape recorders. A dozen or so students said,
“I do.” The teacher said excitedly, “I have an idea. Let’s
play Beethoven’s Eroica again. One of you can record the
theme when it’s first introduced. Then later, someone else
can record it the second time it appears. Finally, we’ll
have another person record when it appears next. Then we
can start all three tape recorders at exactly the same time
to see if the recordings fit!” Her students looked at (d) her
in surprise. Suddenly, however, delight appeared on their
faces. And so it was done. When they played the recordings
simultaneously, the sounds blended sufficiently for the
students to recognize their commonality.
(D)
With this problem in mind, one afternoon during the
lunch hour, she noticed a group of students gathered in a
corner of the school yard. Several girls were moving their
bodies rhythmically. Curious, she drew closer and found
that the students were listening to a new rock hit. A girl
in the center of the group held a tape recorder in (e) her
hand. At that moment, a sudden inspiration took hold.
48. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (C) - (D) ② (B) - (D) - (C)
③ (C) - (B) - (D) ④ (C) - (D) - (B)
⑤ (D) - (B) - (C)
49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
50. 주어진 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 교사는 고전 음악에서 주제가 반복됨을 학생들에게 이해시키려 했다.
② 학생들은 단순한 변주 부분을 이해하는 데 별 문제가 없었다.
③ 교사는 학생들에게 녹음기를 가지고 있는지를 물었다.
④ 학생들은 자신들이 녹음한 세 부분을 차례로 재생해 들었다.
⑤ 몇몇 학생들이 점심시간에 운동장에서 록 음악을 듣고 있었다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1 8
2011학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
제 3 교시 외국어(영어) 영역
성명 수험 번호 3 1
◦ 문제지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 쓰시오.
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 쓰고, 또 수험 번호와
답을 정확히 표시하시오.
◦ 문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을
참고하시오. 1점과 3점 문항에만 점수가 표시되어 있습니다.
점수 표시가 없는 문항은 모두 2점입니다.
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 물건을 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① proud ② worried ③ envious
④ ashamed ⑤ sympathetic
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 친구를 사귈 때 주의해야 할 점
② 유사성이 인간관계에 미치는 영향
③ 성공적인 인간관계 유지의 중요성
④ 단체 생활에 있어서 배려의 필요성
⑤ 교우 관계에 있어서 갈등 해결 방법
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 길 알려주기 ② 식당 예약하기 ③ 음식 주문하기
④ 택시 불러주기 ⑤ 관광지 추천하기
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $20 ② $21 ③ $30 ④ $31 ⑤ $40
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 기금 마련 공연을 홍보하려고
② 신입생 등록 절차를 안내하려고
③ 학생회 선거 일정을 공지하려고
④ 학생회 운영 개선 방안을 제안하려고
⑤ 신입생 환영회 준비 모임을 알리려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
① to enter the book quiz together
② to send the book list via e‑mail
③ to make questions about the books
④ to choose a gift for his grandparents
⑤ to lend him some novels for the quiz
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을
고르시오. [1점]
① 음식점 ② 낚시터 ③ 야구장 ④ 편의점 ⑤ 수족관
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 리포터 ― 운동선수
② 간호사 ― 환자
③ 연출가 ― 배우
④ 체육 교사 ― 학생
⑤ 여행사 직원 ― 고객
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 창고 정리하기 ② 전등갓 청소하기
③ 사다리 빌려오기 ④ 식탁 의자 고치기
⑤ 새 전구 가져오기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 세탁기를
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
12. Green Horizon School에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 오랜 역사를 가진 사립학교이다.
② 학교 소유의 텃밭이 있다.
③ 학생들이 채소를 직접 기른다.
④ 수확한 채소를 팔아 수익을 얻는다.
⑤ 학생들에게 채소를 먹는 습관을 길러준다.
2 외국어(영어) 영역 ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
2 8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
①②③④⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① It has to be in before the deadline of May 1st.
② Okay. I’ll revise the story as you recommended.
③ Sure, I’ll see if she can do it and let you know.
④ Yes, I’ll send you a copy of the school magazine.
⑤ Congratulations! I’m so happy that you won the prize.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Now I understand why Rodin is so famous.
② I’m afraid the admission charge is too much.
③ Right. We’re not allowed to take pictures here.
④ I’d like to buy some postcards at the souvenir shop.
⑤ Good! We can listen to the explanation when we want it.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① It’s too humid here. Let’s turn it off.
② We can hang wet towels in the room.
③ The model you ordered is all sold out.
④ A stuffy nose is a typical symptom of a cold.
⑤ I don’t think so. Dry air isn’t good for furniture.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Nancy가 Mike에게 할 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
Nancy: Mike, .
① we should put off our picnic due to bad weather
② don’t forget to take your umbrella with you
③ let’s stand in the line for another ride
④ you’ll have as many rides as you like this time
⑤ the weather couldn’t be better for outdoor activities
이제 듣기 ․ 말하기 문제는 다 끝났습니다. 18번부터는
문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
It’s a question we’d all like answered: Is there life after
death? In November of 2009 I was pronounced clinically
dead. But the diagnosis was correct only up to a point. My
experience fed a fierce curiosity to know how “normal” such
experiences are. Since that time, I have interviewed 184
people who have also been to the “other side” and returned.
I have a diverse collection of anecdotal evidence that there
is indeed more to life than life. Would you be interested in
seeing some or all of my 70,000‑word manuscript? I can
send the complete manuscript, or if you prefer, sample
chapters and a detailed synopsis. I look forward to hearing
from you as soon as possible.
① 출판 기념회에 초대하려고
② 인터뷰 요청을 거절하려고
③ 잡지에 실을 원고를 의뢰하려고
④ 건강 검진의 중요성을 강조하려고
⑤ 원고에 대한 관심 여부를 알아보려고
19. 밑줄 친 She[she]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Phyllis has arranged to take the morning off to spend time
with her daughter, Gloria. Phyllis is so happy that ① she is
able to spend time with her little angel. Things are moving
right on schedule and ② she heads to the supermarket with
her daughter. Time passes, and with only an hour left before
getting to the office, Phyllis becomes conscious of the clock.
Phyllis tries to place her daughter in the shopping cart, but
③ she repeatedly screams “NO SIT!” With a nervous grin on
her face, Phyllis masks the anger she feels. ④ She has
never been challenged so strongly by Gloria. In all the mess
of the scene, Phyllis does not realize the significance of the
event. For the very first time, ⑤ she heard Gloria put two
words together to express a thought.
20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Archaeologist Mark Aldenderfer set out last year to explore
remote cliffside caves in Nepal’s Mustang district, aiming to
find human remains near an ancient settlement ① high in the
Himalayas. Almost at once, he came face‑to‑face with ②what
he was seeking: Sticking out from the rock, a skull was
looking at him right ③ as he was looking at it. The skull,
dating back perhaps 2,500 years, was among many human
bones ④ piled inside several burial caves. Aldenderfer and his
team hope that DNA analysis will pinpoint the origins of this
isolated region’s inhabitants, who may ⑤ migrate from the
Tibetan Plateau or southern points.
외국어(영어) 영역 3 ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
3 8
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
Ultrasound, an imaging technique, produces an image by
(A) bounce / bouncing sound waves off an object inside the
body. A picture is then made using the reflected sound
waves. The frequency of sound waves used in ultrasound
imaging (B) range / ranges above human hearing. The choice
of frequency depends on how deep into the body the sound
waves are needed to penetrate. Lower frequencies allow
doctors to see structures deeper inside the body. The lower
the frequency, however, the less (C) clear / clearly the image
will become. Doctors use ultrasound to visualize the size and
structure of internal organs.
 (A) (B) (C)
① bounce ······ range ······ clear
② bounce ······ ranges ······ clearly
③ bouncing ······ ranges ······ clear
④ bouncing ······ ranges ······ clearly
⑤ bouncing ······ range ······ clearly
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
We tend to consider water consumption in strictly
immediate terms, such as taking a shower or doing the
laundry. ① But it overlooks the inter‑connectivity of water
use and does not take into account “virtual water”
consumption. ② Virtual water refers to water used in the
production of an industrial or agricultural product. ③ A single
cotton T‑shirt, for example, requires over 700 gallons of
water to be brought into being. ④ Fabrics made of Egyptian
cotton are softer, finer and last longer than any other cotton
in the world. ⑤ While purchasing a T‑shirt involves no direct
water expenditure, the garment is the product of a large
investment of water resources.
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
According to a psychologist, a business executive spends an
hour of his day reading, two hours talking and eight hours
listening. Yet in school we spend a large amount of time
teaching children how to read, a small amount of time teaching
them how to speak, and usually no time at all teaching them
how to listen. I do not believe it would be a good thing to
make what we teach in school exactly proportional to what we
do after school, but I do think we would be wise to give our
children some instruction in the process of listening. Listening
well is an exercise of attention and those who listen well tend
to have good relationships with colleagues.
① 학생들에게 남의 말을 경청하는 법을 가르치자.
② 듣기와 읽기 훈련을 위한 수업 모형을 개발하자.
③ 의사소통이 잘 이루어지는 직장 분위기를 조성하자.
④ 생산성 향상을 위해 직장에서 집중력 훈련을 시키자.
⑤ 직장에서 동료들과 좋은 관계를 유지하도록 노력하자.
[24 ~ 29] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르
시오.
24. Years ago, I was involved in planning a police operation
that was to take place in Lakeland, Florida. As the mission
planner was describing the operation order, he seemed to
have everything covered. His arms were outstretched over
two chairs as he confidently explained the very detailed
arrest plan. Suddenly someone asked, “Have you contacted
the Lakeland ambulance crew?” Instantly the mission planner
withdrew his arms and dropped them between his knees,
palms together. He went from dominating a large space to
being as narrow as possible, all because he had not made
the necessary arrangements. He suddenly lost the initiative.
This is a striking example of how quickly our behaviors ebb
and flow depending on our level of .
① confidence ② intelligence ③ morality
④ patience ⑤ imagination
25. A “pot‑stirrer” is someone who brings up emotional issues
that have already been resolved. Pot‑stirrers want to feed
the emotional fire and keep it burning for the excitement of
the conflict. They can be subtle; they often even appear to
be the “helpful” friend or “caring” listener. Let’s say you’ve
just let go of a minor conflict with your neighbor, when
your other neighbor continues to bring up how annoying this
person is, encouraging you . The same
applies at work. A coworker keeps reminding you that it
was you, not Gail, who really deserved the credit for that
great idea. Every time he or she says it, it upsets you and
opens your wound again.
① to cooperate with your competitors
② to find the virtues of your neighbor
③ not to lose your inner peace of mind
④ to hold on to your irritation with the person
⑤ not to be involved in your neighbor’s business
26. Aristotle distinguished between essential and accidental
properties. Essential properties are those without which a
thing wouldn’t be what it is, and accidental properties are
those that determine how a thing is, but not what it is. For
example, Aristotle thought rationality was essential to being
a human being. Socrates’ rationality was essential to his
being Socrates. On the other hand, Aristotle thought Socrates’
property of being snub‑nosed was merely accidental; being
snub‑nosed was part of how Socrates was, but it wasn’t
essential to what or who he was. In other words, take away
Socrates’ rationality, and , but give him
plastic surgery, and he’s Socrates with a nose job.
① he becomes freer ② it removes how he is
③ he’s no longer Socrates ④ it explains why he lives
⑤ his essential being remains
4 외국어(영어) 영역 ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
4 8
27. A team of researchers found out the alarming low death
rate of a small village of Roseto and started to investigate
it. While investigating, they realized that the secret of
Roseto wasn’t diet or exercise or genes or location. They
looked at how the Rosetans visited one another. They
learned about the extended family clans that underlay the
town’s social structure. They saw how many homes had
three generations living under one roof, and how much
respect grandparents commanded. They noticed the particular
belief in equality of the community, which discouraged the
wealthy from boasting about their success and helped the
unsuccessful obscure their failures. These findings suggested
the Rosetans had created .
① a unique and effective farming method
② a healthy, well‑balanced diet for the old
③ an education system to maintain their culture
④ a closely connected and protective social structure
⑤ an economic policy increasing the income of the village
28. In a study, hundreds of participants were asked to watch a
short film and then discuss it with another participant. Half
the participants were given an “impression management goal”
to appear outgoing, smart, or happy. After the discussions,
participants rated themselves and the person they had chatted
with across several personality traits. Those with an
impression management goal rated their conversation partner
significantly lower on the trait they were trying to show in
themselves, but not on other personality traits. This seems
to happen because when we focus on exaggerating a
particular trait in ourselves, we unconsciously increase the
standard for that trait in others ― and they usually fall
short. So just because someone you’re trying to impress
doesn’t seem as active, friendly or positive as you are,
don’t assume that they truly aren’t. It could just be that
 has changed the game. [3점]
① how many partners you have to rate
② what kind of movie you’d like to see
③ what personality traits your partner possesses
④ how different your opinions about the movie are
⑤ what impression you are trying to give to others
29. Farmers plant more seeds than are necessary to ensure
full breeding. If more plants sprout than are necessary, the
extra plants should be pulled out, before they choke out the
most promising sprout. It can be difficult for farmers to kill
their own offspring, even though they know it’s for the best.
Writers sometimes face the same dilemma. You are faced
with tough choices where certain scenes you love and worked
hard on just don’t fit into the story. Maybe there is a
character you adore, but he does nothing to move the story
along. If you are getting good sound advice from all around
you that certain materials don’t work, think about being
flexible in order to . [3점]
① find a way to make your story more complex
② gather as many details as possible for your work
③ make sure you don’t choke out the story with them
④ conceal the place you want to go with your readers
⑤ have a good opportunity to analyze other people’s works
30. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
In Europe, if your industry declines and you lose your job,
it is a big blow but not the end of the world. You will still
keep your health insurance and public housing, while
receiving unemployment benefits, government‑subsidized
retraining and government help in your job search. (A) ,
if you are a worker in the US, you’d better hold on to your
current job because losing your job means losing almost
everything. Unemployment insurance coverage is smaller than
in Europe. There is little public help with retraining and job
search. More frighteningly, losing your job means losing your
health insurance and your home, as there is little public
housing or public subsidies for your rent. (B) , worker
resistance to any industrial restructuring that involves job
cuts is much greater in the US than in Europe.
 * subsidize: 보조금을 주다
(A) (B)
① In contrast ······ Nonetheless
② In contrast ······ As a result
③ Similarly ······ Nonetheless
④ Similarly ······ In short
⑤ In other words ······ As a result
31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
It is the elderly who often suffer the most as temperatures
drop. Physiologically, their blood vessels are more liable to
(A) contract / expand and their blood pressure rises.
Financially, they are less likely to turn up the heating and
more likely to use public transport. Socially, they may have
fewer people around them to (B) identify / intensify their
problems. One of the effects of aging is that your body is
less able to regulate its temperature, so you become less
able to judge if you are warm or cold. Failing to keep
adequately warm can (C) adapt / expose older people to the
threat of cold‑related illnesses, which contribute to thousands
of excess winter deaths each year.
 (A) (B) (C)
① contract ······ identify ······ adapt
② contract ······ intensify ······ expose
③ contract ······ identify ······ expose
④ expand ······ intensify ······ adapt
⑤ expand ······ identify ······ adapt
외국어(영어) 영역 5 ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
5 8
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
We tend to think of the skin as a separate organ ― just a
① wrapping of our more delicate inner parts. But the skin is
connected to every system in the body ― from your circular
and digestive systems to your immune and nervous systems.
All must work ② interactively for total body health. Both
heart and skin, for example, rely on veins. This helps explain
why, when you get angry, your heart beats faster and your
face ③ reddens. This interconnectedness between the skin
and the internal body is largely forgotten by people who see
skin as a ④ connected entity. It’s a two‑way street. When
we damage the skin, we damage our insides. Similarly, what
we experience inside our bodies could have ⑤ indications on
the outside.
[33 ~ 34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. For many generations, scholars and artists tended to
concentrate their energy on one particular subject. For
Shakespeare, that interest was literature. For Mozart, that
interest was musical composition, and for Newton, physics.
Visual artists were not expected to understand higher
mathematics, nor were philosophers expected to study
engineering. However, with the development of the Internet
and other sources of instantaneous information, many people
strive to gain at least a working knowledge of many different
subjects. So‑called pancake people no longer concentrate their
energies on one area of interest, but instead choose to
spread themselves thinly over a large area. As a result, a
new generation of pancake people have essentially become
the proverbial jacks of all trades, but masters of none.
① new jobs produced by the Internet
② rise of the new generation of artists
③ characteristics of young people’s thinking
④ necessity of instantaneous information sources
⑤ appearance of people with varied but superficial knowledge
34. Bright colored foods frequently seem to taste better than
bland‑looking foods, even when the flavor compounds are
identical. Foods that somehow look off‑color often seem to
have off tastes. For thousands of years, human beings have
relied on visual cues to help determine what is edible. The
color of fruit suggests whether it is ripe; the color of meat
whether it is fresh. Flavor researchers sometimes use
colored lights to modify the influence of visual cues during taste
tests. During one experiment in the early 1970s, people were
served an oddly colored meal of steak and French fries that
appeared normal beneath colored lights. Everyone thought
that the meal tasted fine until the lighting was changed.
Once it became apparent that the steak was actually blue
and the fries were green, some people became ill.
① effect of color of food on taste perception
② ways to improve the taste of food
③ difficulty of preserving food
④ growing popularity of food decoration
⑤ factors influencing the nutritional value of food
35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows how tuition fees and dorm and
board costs for full‑time college students changed over the
last 30 years. ① Over the period, both college tuition fees
and dorm and board costs for full‑time students went up
steadily. ② Of all the periods, the 1978‑1979 period was the
only one when college students paid more for their dorm and
board costs than for their tuition fees. ③ During the
1988‑1989 period, tuition fees surpassed dorm and board
costs for the first time and the former cost more than the
latter thereafter. ④ The tuition fees of the 2008‑2009 period
were more than twice those of the 1993‑1994 period. ⑤ The
gap between tuition fees and dorm and board costs was the
biggest during the 2008‑2009 period.
36. pilum에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The pilum was a heavy spear, used for thrusting or
throwing by Roman soldiers. It had a leaf‑shaped iron head,
60 to 90 centimeters long, embedded in or socketed onto a
wooden shaft with a short iron spike at the rear. Its length
seems to have been around 163 centimeters, although
examples as long as 274 centimeters were found in the
excavation of a swamp site in Illerup, Denmark. Roman
armies were the only ones who used the pilum, which may
mean there were strict regulations on its manufacture and
trade. During the second century A.D. there was a decline in
the use of the pilum, but in the third and fourth centuries it
regained its popularity and was used against the early
barbarian invaders.
① 가벼워서 쉽게 던질 수 있었다.
② 전체가 철로 만들어졌다.
③ 길이가 2미터가 넘는 것도 있었다.
④ 누구나 쉽게 만들어 팔 수 있었다.
⑤ 3세기 이후에는 사용되지 않았다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역 ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
6 8
37. FMD에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Foot‑and‑Mouth Disease(FMD) is a highly contagious
disease caused by a virus. It is almost exclusive to cattle,
sheep, swine, goats, and other cloven‑hoofed animals. Among
its symptoms are fever, loss of appetite and weight, and
blisters on the tongue, lips, other tissues of the mouth, and
the feet. The disease is readily spread by contact; by
contaminated food or water; or through the air. Humans, who
seldom contract the disease, may be carriers, as may rats,
dogs, birds, and wild animals. Complete disposal of infected
animals and disinfection of contaminated material are
prescribed to limit contagion. No effective treatment exists;
vaccines control epidemics but have not eliminated them.
 * cloven‑hoofed: 발굽이 갈라진
① 바이러스에 의해 유발되며 전염성이 강하다.
② 감염시 체중 감소 증상이 나타나기도 한다.
③ 공기를 통해 전염되기도 한다.
④ 사람에 의해서는 전파되지 않는다.
⑤ 현재 효과적인 치료법은 존재하지 않는다.
38. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
I packed the few things that I possessed, and I set out on
a journey westward to my uncle’s. I mourned both for my
mother and the world I was leaving behind. Before I
disappeared behind the hills, I turned and looked at my
village for the last time. I could see the simple huts and the
people going about their chores; the stream where I had
splashed and played with the other boys; the maize fields
and green pastures where the herds and flocks were lazily
grazing. Above all else, my eyes rested on the simple hut
where I had enjoyed my mother’s love. It was this hut that
I associated with all my happiness, with life itself, and I
rued the fact that I had not kissed it before I left.
① sad and sorry ② moved and happy
③ upset and nervous ④ shocked and scared
⑤ bored and depressed
[39 ~ 40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. Consider a fascinating study by a major French food
manufacturer testing two different containers for a diet
mayonnaise product aimed at female shoppers. Both
containers held the exact same mayonnaise and bore the
exact same label. The only difference was the shapes of the
bottles. The first was narrow around the middle, and thicker
at the top and on the bottom. The second had a slender neck
but a fat, round bottom, like a genie bottle. When asked
which product they preferred, every single subject ― all
diet‑conscious females ― selected the first bottle without
even having tasted the stuff. Why? The researchers
concluded that the subjects were associating the shape of the
bottle with an image of their own bodies.
① 소비자들은 상품 광고의 영향을 많이 받는다.
② 상품의 겉모습이 소비자들의 선택에 영향을 미친다.
③ 소비자들은 상품의 가격보다 품질을 더 중요시한다.
④ 광고매체에 따라 광고의 형식과 내용도 달라져야 한다.
⑤ 소비자들은 결국 상표에 의해 형성된 이미지를 구매한다.
40. The motor of our ingenuity is the question “Does it have
to be like this?”, from which arise political reforms,
scientific developments, improved relationships, and better
books. The Romans hated winter cold and developed
under‑floor heating. They didn’t wish to walk on muddy
roads, so they paved them. They didn’t want to suffer the
frustration of a shallow public baths, so they drew water
through mountains and across valleys in a system of
aqueducts and underground pipes. The Chinese didn’t want to
find their sailors lost on the sea, so they invented a
compass to help them. They were unhappy when the sailing
ship could only move when the wind blew from behind them,
so they invented sails that allowed ships to sail against the
wind. There would be few great human achievements if we
accepted all our frustrations. * aqueduct: 수로(水路)
① 문명의 이기가 인간성의 파괴 현상을 낳을 수 있다.
② 모든 문명에 공통적으로 발견되는 문화 현상이 있다.
③ 발명품에는 한 국가의 민족성이 그대로 반영되어 있다.
④ 예기치 못한 실수로 위대한 발명품이 탄생하기도 한다.
⑤ 문명의 발전은 현실의 불편을 극복하려는 노력의 결과이다.
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. The forbidding sands of the Sahara might seem an unusual
place for farming. But if you’re farming silicon to make solar
panels, the conditions in the Sahara are more or less
optimal. At least, that’s the thinking behind the Sahara Solar
Breeder Project. The plan, a joint project proposed by
Japanese and Algerian universities, would use the desert’s
immense supplies of sunlight and sand to “breed” solar
power plants and solar panel factories. The idea is to start
with a small number of silicon manufacturing plants that will
produce the silicon needed to manufacture solar panels. Once
those panels are operating, they can be used to power the
silicon plants, which in turn produce more silicon and solar
panels. The universities envision breeding enough silicon and
solar panels by 2050 to supply half the world’s energy.
① Benefits of Industry‑University Cooperation
② A Plan Turns Desert into Energy Farm
③ Tourists Come into the Sahara for Solitude
④ Power Shortage Worsens in North Africa
⑤ Solar Panels: Excellent Tools for Clean Energy
외국어(영어) 영역 7 ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
7 8
42. A tree seems to be vulnerable in many aspects. Its overall
architectural and biological design would seem to doom it from
the start. A narrow trunk topped by a gigantic sail made of
leaves would seem to make it a structure destined to fall over
in even a modest wind. The distance between the roots, which
gather the water, and the leaves, which transform that water
via photosynthesis, is a long, gravity‑defying journey ―in some
cases a trip exceeding the length of a football field. Their
initial growth, a very slow pace compared with the shrubs and
weeds around them, would seem to set up a battle for sunlight
and water they could never win. Yet, trees have not only
survived but thrived.
① Various Uses of Trees
② A Tree: An Amazing Thing
③ Why Tree Species Are Decreasing
④ Trees: An Indicator of Earth’s Health
⑤ How Trees Communicate with Each Other
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Anthropologist Brain Hare has done experiments with
dogs, where he puts a piece of food under one of two
cups, placed several feet apart. The dog knows that there
is food to be had, but has no idea which of the cups
holds the prize.
(A) This difference is in their cooperations with humans.
Hare explains that primates are very good at using the
cues of the same species. But they are not good at
using human cues when you are trying to cooperate
with them.
(B) In contrast, dogs pay attention to humans, when humans
are doing something very human. Dogs aren’t smarter
than chimps, but they just have a different attitude
toward people, and they are really interested in humans.
(C) Then, Hare points at the right cup, taps on it, and looks
directly at it. What happens? The dog goes to the right
cup virtually every time. Yet when Hare did the same
experiment with chimpanzees, the chimps couldn’t get it
right. A dog will look at you for help, and a chimp
won’t.
① (A) ‑ (C) ‑ (B) ② (B) ‑ (A) ‑ (C)
③ (B) ‑ (C) ‑ (A) ④ (C) ‑ (A) ‑ (B)
⑤ (C) ‑ (B) ‑ (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
Some consumers still remain loyal to the brand‑name
drug, perhaps out of fear that the new generic drugs are
not actually the same as the drug they have been using
for years.
When a firm discovers a new drug, patent laws give the
firm a monopoly on the sale of that drug. ( ① ) During the
life of the patent, the monopoly firm maximizes profit by
controlling the quantity and the price. ( ② ) But eventually
when the patent on a drug expires, other companies quickly
enter the market and begin selling so‑called generic products
that are chemically identical to the former monopolist’s
brand‑name product. ( ③ ) And expectedly, the price of the
competitively produced generic drug is well below the price
that the monopolist was charging. ( ④ ) The expiration of
a patent, however, does not cause the monopolist to lose all
its market power. ( ⑤ )　As a result, the former monopolist
can continue to charge a price at least somewhat above the
price charged by its new competitors.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Architects are usually rewarded according to the
uniqueness of their work. But an architect intent on being
different may in the end prove as troubling as an
over‑imaginative pilot or doctor. However important
originality may be, adherence to familiar form emerges as
the more significant virtue in architecture. We rarely wish
to be surprised by novelty as we go round street corners.
We require consistency in our buildings, for there is
already too much confusion around us. We need the
discipline offered by similarity, just as children need
regular bedtimes and familiar foods. We require that our
buildings act as guardians of composure when we are in
them. The architects who benefit us most may be those
generous enough to lay aside their claims to genius. They
will devote themselves to designing graceful but unoriginal
buildings, where we will not feel disoriented.
󰀻
Architects should try to offer people calmness coming
from (A) rather than focus on the (B) of
their work.
(A) (B)
① familiarity ······ originality
② familiarity ······ profits
③ safety ······ popularity
④ safety ······ originality
⑤ beauty ······ popularity
8 외국어(영어) 영역 ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
8 8
[46 ~ 48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Sen no Rikyu was the most famous tea master of all in
Japan. He was famous for his remarkable ability to
harmonize himself with his guests’ thoughts and to think
one step ahead, enchanting them by adapting to their
taste. Once, another great 16th‑century Japanese tea
master Takeno Sho‑o passed by a house. (a) He noticed
a young man watering flowers near his front gate. Two
things caught Sho‑o’s attention — first, the graceful way
the man performed his task; second, the beautiful rose of
Sharon blossoms that bloomed in the garden.
(B)
Now, disappointed, he started to leave, but at the gate
he stopped himself, and decided to enter Sen no Rikyu’s
tea room. Immediately inside, (b) he stopped in his
tracks and gazed in astonishment: Before him a vase
hung from the ceiling, and in the vase stood a single
rose of Sharon blossom, the most beautiful one in the
garden. Somehow Sen no Rikyu , and
with this one eloquent gesture, had demonstrated that
this day’s guest and host would be in perfect harmony.
(C)
Sen no Rikyu was no magician or seer — he watched
those around him acutely, understanding the subtle
gestures that revealed a hidden desire, then producing that
desire’s image. Although Sho‑o never spoke of being
enchanted by the rose of Sharon blossoms, Rikyu read it
in his eye. (c) He knew that studying people’s eyes was a
surer barometer of pain and pleasure than any spoken
word.
(D)
He stopped and introduced himself to the man, whose
name was Sen no Rikyu. Sho‑o wanted to stay, but had
to hurry off for a prior engagement. Before Sho‑o left,
however, Rikyu invited him to take tea with him the next
morning. Sho‑o happily accepted. When Sho‑o opened the
garden gate the next day, (d) he was horrified to see not
a single flower remained. More than anything else, he
had come there to see the rose of Sharon blossoms that
(e) he had not had the time to appreciate the day before.
46. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) ‑ (D) ‑ (C) ② (C) ‑ (B) ‑ (D)
③ (C) ‑ (D) ‑ (B) ④ (D) ‑ (B) ‑ (C)
⑤ (D) ‑ (C) ‑ (B)
47. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
48. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① had invited Sho‑o’s family
② had read his guest’s thoughts
③ had helped Sho‑o pick flowers
④ had presented a set of teapots
⑤ had supported Sho‑o financially
[49 ~ 50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Most managers want huge results with little risk. It just
doesn’t work that way. You’ve got to encourage risk
taking without penalty. Human beings by nature hate to
lose. We’re willing to take risks when there’s little
downside, especially if we can see a huge potential
upside. But when things are going fine, we shy away
from taking risks. Not a good idea! In a corporation, too
often it’s one foul and you’re benched. But in the NBA,
every player is allowed six fouls per game. Company
managers and executives should establish a six‑foul rule,
and make it known to everyone.
Think about how some of the most successful coaches
in the NBA view fouls. If LeBron and Kobe end the game
with zero fouls, you know they’re not playing their best
game. If they end the game with five fouls, they’ve
pushed it to the limit and chances are they’ve scored
more points, gotten more rebounds, and gotten more
steals. Once in a while, you foul out. That’s part of the
game. Winners know one thing all too well: You’re not
going to win every game. Let your players get their
fouls. Innovations will come faster, sales will be higher,
and you’ll learn from failure.
Remember the traditional path is , but it will
produce average results, average market share, and
average profits. Unless you climb a mountain, you may
never know what you missed.
49. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Create a Foul‑allowed Environment
② Don’t Commit Fouls in Games
③ Star Players’ Role in Sports
④ Honesty: A Sure Way to Success
⑤ Fair Play: A Necessity in Business
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① challenging ② off‑balance ③ risk‑free
④ steep ⑤ ill‑judged
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.

1
8
2012학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 선택한 조각상 디자인을 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① angry ② envious ③ nervous
④ relieved ⑤ impressed
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 컴퓨터 사양과 업무 효율의 관련성
② 노트북 컴퓨터 과열 방지 방법
③ 컴퓨터 바이러스 예방 대책
④ 노트북 컴퓨터 배터리 관리 방법
⑤ 노트북 컴퓨터 절전 모드 설정 방법
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 보건실 청소하기 ② 약 사러 가기
③ 담임선생님에게 전화하기 ④ 피자 배달하기
⑤ 병원에 데려다 주기
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $144 ② $148 ③ $150
④ $154 ⑤ $160
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 환경 보호 단체 가입을 요청하려고
② 콘서트 장소 변경을 공지하려고
③ 공연 중 소란에 대해 사과하려고
④ 콘서트 취소 사실을 통보하려고
⑤ 공연장 내 질서 유지를 당부하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 창문 청소하기 ② 제품 주문해 주기
③ 구두 닦아 주기 ④ 아버지 선물 고르기
⑤ 쇼핑 채널 알려주기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을
고르시오.
① 어린이집 ② 미용실
③ 장난감 가게 ④ 옷가게
⑤ 애완동물 용품점
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 가구점 사장 - 직원 ② 선생님 - 학부모
③ 지하철역 직원 - 승객 ④ 부동산 중개인 - 고객
⑤ 실내장식 디자이너 - 집주인
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to pick up the car ② to make a reservation
③ to call the Browns ④ to go grocery shopping
⑤ to buy some medicine
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지원할 직종을 고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
12. 다음을 듣고, 마술 공연에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① Fantasia Gallery 개관 기념으로 열린다.
② 카드 마술로 유명한 John Potter가 출연할 예정이다.
③ 본관 Stage A에서 오후 4시에 열린다.
④ 금일 Fantasia Gallery 방문객은 공연관람료 할인을 받는다.
⑤ 6세 미만의 아이는 어른이 동반해야 한다.
제 3 교시
2 외국어(영어) 영역
2
8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I don’t know how to sell the TV.
② It won’t be easy to park in the garage.
③ That’s why the place looks a lot bigger.
④ You paid way too much for the apartment.
⑤ That sofa looks very comfortable to sit in.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Don’t worry. Go see a doctor and take care.
② Great job! The design on them looks very nice.
③ Thanks so much. I can pick them up right away.
④ You’re a lifesaver. They’re in a box on my desk.
⑤ Hurry up. We have to receive them by tomorrow.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① No problem. What time do you go to work?
② Sure. Could you get me something to drink?
③ Okay. How much are you planning to invest?
④ Great. Are you the person to talk to about this job?
⑤ Certainly. Can you recommend me to Jack Anderson?
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Elizabeth가 Roger에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Elizabeth:
① We should put a box here to reuse the paper.
② Do you know why they moved the copy machine?
③ How about using recycled ink instead of regular ink?
④ The boss says we need 20 more copies for the meeting.
⑤ You need to call a mechanic to repair the computer.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
This is an official notice from KGM, the largest manufacturer
of digital cameras in the world, regarding the rules of KGM’s
Big World Competition. First, anyone over the age of 18 is
eligible, with the exception of professional photographers.
Second, all photographs must be taken using a KGM camera.
Third, the size of your image file cannot exceed 100 megabytes.
Finally, entries must be uploaded to our website no later than
July 25, 2011. Failure to comply with any of the above rules
will disqualify the entry. A list of winners will be posted on
the website on August 15, and all winning pictures will be
displayed at the KGM gallery for a period of one year.
① 전문 사진작가를 모집하려고
② 최신형 카메라의 성능을 설명하려고
③ 사진 촬영 시 주의사항을 전달하려고
④ 사진 콘테스트 참가 시 유의사항을 안내하려고
⑤ 카메라 회사의 고객 지원 프로그램을 홍보하려고
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Lantin decided on a necklace which had been one of his
wife’s favorites. ① It must be worth at least seven or eight
francs he thought, because for an imitation piece the
workmanship was very good. He put it in his pocket and went
looking for a reliable-looking jeweler. At length he saw
② one and went in, a little ashamed of selling something so
worthless. “Monsieur,” he said to the dealer, “I’d like you to
value ③ this piece for me if you’d be so kind.” The man took
④ the article, examined it, turned it over, weighed it, and took
up a magnifying glass to look at it more closely. Lantin was a
little embarrassed by all this ceremony and was about to say,
“Look, I’m pretty sure it’s got no value at all,” when the
jeweler announced: “Monsieur, I’d put it at between 12,000
and 15,000 francs. However, I could not purchase ⑤ this from
you without knowing its exact provenance.”
* provenance: 출처
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
When induced to give spoken or written witness to
something they doubt, people will often feel bad about their
deceit. Nevertheless, they begin to believe (A) what / that they
are saying. When there is no compelling external explanation
for one’s words, saying becomes believing. Tory Higgins and
his colleagues had university students read a personality
description of someone and then (B) summarize / summarized
it for someone else who was believed either to like or to dislike
this person. The students wrote a more positive description
when the recipient liked the person. Having said positive
things, they also then liked the person more themselves.
(C) Asked / Asking to recall what they had read, they remembered
the description as being more positive than it was. In short, it
seems that we are prone to adjust our messages to our listeners,
and, having done so, to believe the altered message.
(A) (B) (C)
① what …… summarize …… Asked
② what …… summarize …… Asking
③ what …… summarized …… Asked
④ that …… summarized …… Asking
⑤ that …… summarized …… Asked
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
We want to stop watching so much TV, but demonstrably,
we also want to watch lots of TV. So what we really want, it
seems, ① is to stop wanting. We ② are trapped deep in a
paradox: deciding on the best course of action, then doing
something else. The way around this is ③ to see that habits
are responses to needs. This sounds ④ obvious, but countless
efforts at habit change ignore its implications. If you eat
badly, you might resolve to start eating well. However, if you
are eating burgers and ice-cream to feel comforted, relaxed
and happy, ⑤ try to replace them with broccoli and carrot
juice is like dealing with a leaky bathroom tap by repainting
the kitchen. What is required is not a better diet, but an
alternative way to feel comforted and relaxed.
22. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
A way to get things done more efficiently and get better
results is to do the right thing at the right time of day. Know
your own body rhythm, respect your internal clock, and pay
attention to how your energy level ebbs and flows during the
day. If you have lots of energy early in the morning, that is
when you should schedule difficult activities, whether for you
these are brainstorming, writing, or practicing. Use the same
principle in planning activities for your team. Schedule
intervals of productive time and breaks so that you get the most
from people. I always ask people to respect their own body
rhythms when scheduling appointments. In my experience,
most people are far more productive in the morning, but there
are those who differ and hit their stride later in the day.
① 업무 성과를 높이기 위해 오후 근무시간을 늘려라.
② 신체리듬에 따라 일할 수 있도록 배려하라.
③ 업무의 특성에 따라 계획을 효과적으로 세우게 하라.
④ 어려운 일은 공동 작업을 통해 해결하게 하라.
⑤ 적절한 휴식 간격을 유지함으로써 신체리듬을 조절하게 하라.
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Since the 1980’s, zoos have strived to reproduce the natural
habitats of their animals, replacing concrete floors and steel
bars with grass, rocks, trees, and pools of water. These
environments may simulate the wild, but the animals do not have
to worry about finding food, shelter, or safety from predators.
① While this may not seem like such a bad deal at first glance,
the animals experience numerous complications. ② And yet,
most of the complications were settled with no delay in order to
ensure the animals’ health and safety. ③ The zebras live
constantly in fear, smelling the lions in the nearby Great Cats
exhibit every day and finding themselves unable to escape.
④ There is no possibility of migrating or of storing food for the
winter, which must seem to promise equally certain doom to a
bird or bear. ⑤ In short, zoo life is utterly incompatible with an
animal’s most deeply-rooted survival instincts.
* doom: 파멸, 종말
[24~28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. The wrapping of Christmas presents, William Waits notes,
is a fairly recent phenomenon in American life. It arose at the
turn of the 20th century, during a period when hand-made
presents were giving way to machine-made, store-bought
ones. For both givers and manufacturers, this shift presented a
problem, for the machine-made items, precisely because they
were convenient, represented less of the giver’s personal
attention than the hand-made items had done; thus they were
symbolically less intimate. To disguise this loss of symbolic
value, and to invest the manufactured items with a personal
touch, retailers encouraged shoppers to have their purchases
gift-wrapped. Gift-wrapping, in Waits’s acute term, became a
‘decontaminating mechanism’ that removed the presents from
the ‘normal flow of bought-and-sold goods’ and made them,
for a single ceremonial moment, emblems of rather
than commerce.
* emblem: 상징
① intimacy ② disguise ③ generosity
④ convenience ⑤ encouragement
25. Some people tend to be late as a general rule, whether they
are busy or not. To stop being late, all one has to do is change
the motivation by deciding that in all circumstances being
on time is going to have first priority over any other
consideration. Presto! You will never have to run for a plane
or miss an appointment again. As a lifelong latecomer, that is
how I cured myself. Having made the decision that
was now of major importance, I found that answers came
automatically to such questions as “Can I squeeze in one more
errand before the dentist?” or “Do I have to leave for the
airport now?” The answers are always no, and yes. Choosing
to be on time will make your life enormously easier, and that
of your family, friends, and colleagues as well.
① harmony ② precision ③ promptness
④ consistency ⑤ thriftiness
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4
8
26. The hazards of migration range from storms to starvation,
but they are outweighed by the advantages to be found in the
temporary superabundance of food in the summer home. The
process of evolution ensures that a species migrates only if it
pays it to do so. Birds of the same species may be migratory
in one area, but sedentary elsewhere. Most song thrushes
migrate from northern Scotland; but in the south of England,
the balance of advantage against disadvantage is so delicate
that while some migrate to Spain and Portugal, the majority
normally over winter. Moreover,
England’s winters have been getting warmer since the late
1980’s and if the trend continues it is likely that our song
thrushes will become increasingly sedentary.
* sedentary: 이주하지 않는 ** thrush: [조류] 개똥지빠귀
① suffer from a scarcity of food
② do not lay eggs
③ stay in England
④ fly back to Scotland
⑤ migrate somewhere north of England
27. Some people believe that is some kind
of instinct, developed because it benefits our species in some
way. At first, this seems like a strange idea: Darwin’s theories
of evolution presume that individuals should act to preserve
their own interests, not those of the species as a whole. But
the British evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins believes
that natural selection has given us the ability to feel pity for
someone who is suffering. When humans lived in small
clan-based groups, a person in need would be a relative or
someone who could pay you back a good turn later, so taking
pity on others could benefit you in the long run. Modern
societies are much less close-knit and when we see a heartfelt
appeal for charity, chances are we may never even meet the
person who is suffering ― but the emotion of pity is still in
our genes. [3점]
① not wanting to suffer ② giving to charity
③ drawing pity from others ④ exploring alternatives
⑤ pursuing individual interests
28. Essentially, your reputation is your most valuable asset ―
so guard it well. But do not be terribly demoralized if you make
some mistakes along the way. With time it is possible to repair
a stained reputation. Every experience you have with someone
else is like a drop of water falling into a pool. As your
experiences with that person grow, the drops accumulate and
the pool deepens. Positive interactions are clear drops of water
and negative interactions are red drops of water. But they
are not equal. That is, , and
that number differs for different people. Those who are very
forgiving only need a few positive experiences ― clear drops
― to dilute a bad experience, while those who are less
forgiving need a lot more to wash away the red. [3점]
① a number of clear drops can dry up with time
② a drop of red water can lead your life to ruin
③ a number of water drops can affect your experience
④ a number of red drops can accumulate gradually
⑤ a number of clear drops can dilute one red drop
[29~30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
29. When you are picking out products in the grocery store,
searching for the best possible strawberry jam, you are trying
to maximize your own enjoyment. You are the only person
that matters; it is your sense of pleasure that you are trying to
please. In this case, (A) is the ideal strategy. You
should listen to those cells in the brain that tell you what you
really want. However, when you are making a moral decision,
this egocentric strategy backfires. Moral decisions require taking
other people into account. You cannot act like a greedy brute
or let your anger get out of control. Doing the right thing
means thinking about (B) , using the emotional
brain to mirror the emotions of strangers. Selfishness needs to
be balanced by some selflessness.
* backfire: 역효과를 낳다
(A) (B)
① selflessness …… your neighbors
② selflessness …… utmost justice
③ self-esteem …… genuine happiness
④ selfishness …… eternal beauty
⑤ selfishness …… everybody else
30. We tend to consider ourselves as rational decision makers,
logically evaluating the costs and benefits of each alternative
we encounter. (A) , we are much more primitive than
most assume. A team of economists looked at how consumers
reacted to various pitches by banks to take out a loan. A
purely rational view would have predicted that interest rates
would be the only factor that had an impact. But the scientists
varied more than just the interest rate; they also tested how
persuasive other approaches might be. (B) , some
letters offered a chance to win a cell phone in a lottery if the
customer came in to inquire about a loan. They found that
such an offer increased loan inquiries by as much as dropping
the interest rate five points. For a $50,000 loan, this meant
some customers were in essence willing to pay $16,000 more
in interest to receive a $100 cell phone.
(A) (B)
① However …… For instance
② However …… Moreover
③ Furthermore …… In contrast
④ Likewise …… In other words
⑤ Likewise …… Consequently
31. 다음 글에 드러난 버스 승객들의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
It is the end of a long, tiring day at Walt Disney World, and a
busload of parents and children are starting the twenty-minute
ride back to their hotel. The children are overstimulated and
annoyed, and so are the parents. Everyone is whiny. It is a bus
ride from hell. Then, rising above the unpleasant buzz of
complaining children and parents, comes a thin, persistent
melody: The bus driver has started to sing the song ‘Under the
Sea’ from the movie The Little Mermaid. Everyone begins to
quiet down and listen. Eventually a little girl joins in, then
several more children. By the end of the ride everyone is
singing ‘The Circle of Life’ from the movie The Lion King.
The bus ride from hell has become the pleasurable, song-filled
end to a full day.
① irritated → delighted ② ashamed → grateful
③ excited → depressed ④ amused → frightened
⑤ relaxed → perplexed
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
32. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Back in the 1870’s, Sholes & Co., a leading manufacturer of
typewriters at the time, received many (A) complaints /
compliments from users about typewriter keys sticking
together if the operator went too fast. In response, management
asked its engineers to figure out a way to prevent this from
happening. The engineers discussed the problem and then one
of them said, “What if we (B) turned / slowed the operator
down? If we did that, the keys would not jam together nearly
as much.” The result was to have an inefficient keyboard
configuration. For example, the letters ‘O’ and ‘I’ are the third
and sixth most frequently used letters in the English language,
and yet the engineers positioned them on the keyboard so that
the relatively weaker fingers had to depress them. This ‘inefficient
logic’ pervaded the keyboard, and (C) triggered / solved the
problem of keyboard jam-up.
(A) (B) (C)
① complaints …… turned …… triggered
② complaints …… slowed …… triggered
③ complaints …… slowed …… solved
④ compliments …… slowed …… solved
⑤ compliments …… turned …… solved
33. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
According to Cambodian legends, lions once roamed the
countryside attacking villagers and their precious buffalo, and
long before the great Khmer Empire began in the 9th century,
farmers developed a fierce martial art to defend themselves
against the ① predator. These techniques became bokator.
Meaning ‘to fight a lion,’ bokator is a martial art ② depicted
on the walls of Angkor Wat. There are 10,000 moves to
master, ③ mimicking animals such as monkeys, elephants and
even ducks. King Jayavarman VII, the warrior king who
united Cambodia in the 12th century, made his army train in
bokator, turning it into a ④ fearsome fighting force. Despite
its long tradition in Cambodia, bokator ⑤ flourished when the
Khmer Rouge took power in 1975 and executed most of the
discipline’s masters over the next four years.
[34~35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. While in Japan, I ordered green tea with sugar at a
restaurant. A waiter politely explained that one does not drink
green tea with sugar. I responded that I was aware of this
custom but I liked my tea sweet. The waiter took up the issue
with the manager. After a lengthy conversation, the manager
came over and said, “I’m very sorry. We don’t have sugar.”
Disappointed, I changed my order to a cup of coffee, which
the waiter soon brought over. Resting on the saucer were two
packets of sugar. My failure to obtain a cup of sweet green tea
was due to a fundamental difference in our ideas about choice.
In America, a paying customer has every right to have a
request met. But from a Japanese perspective, it is their duty
to protect those who do not know any better.
① historical perspectives on Japanese customs
② difficulty of altering tea-drinking habits
③ various factors influencing customer preference
④ health benefits of drinking green tea
⑤ cultural difference in dealing with customer requests
35. After a stressful day, how do you wind down and clear your
mind? Relaxing in a comfortable chair, putting on some
soothing sounds, and reading something light and entertaining
are all good methods to get ready for some restful sleep. But as
you ease your exhausted senses, do not forget your sense of
smell. Certain aromas can fill you with feelings of tranquility,
and research has found that lavender, vanilla, and green apple
are among the best smells to help lower anxiety and induce
sleep. You can use essential oils of these scents by applying
them to the back of your neck or the inside of your wrist. Even
better, indulge in a warm bath with these oils dissolved in the
water. Before bed, you might enjoy a glass of hot soy milk with
natural vanilla flavoring for a calming effect inside and out.
① usefulness of aroma for restful sleep
② factors inhibiting good sleep
③ origins of aromatic stress-relievers
④ reasons for stress and fatigue
⑤ ways of extracting various essential oils
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the types of websites people use
when they look for new information online. ① The most
preferred type of websites is Search Engines, whereas the least
preferred type of websites is Facebook, Myspace, Twitter, etc.
② The combined percentage of the two most preferred types
of websites is seventy one. ③ While there is only a three
percent difference between the top two most preferred types of
websites, there is more than a twenty percent gap between the
second and the third most preferred types of websites. ④ The
three least preferred types of websites are Wikipedia, Blogs,
and Facebook, Myspace, Twitter, etc. ⑤ When the percentages
of the types of websites in Social Media are combined, the
result exceeds the percentage of Sites Dedicated to a Specific
Area by ten percent.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6
8
37. Guillaume de Machaut에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Guillaume de Machaut, who was famous as both a musician
and a poet, was born in the French province of Champagne. He
studied theology and spent much of his life in the service of
various royal families. Around 1323, he became secretary and
chaplain to John, king of Bohemia, whom he accompanied on
trips and military campaigns throughout Europe. In his later
years he lived mainly in Reims, where he served as a church
official. Machaut traveled to many courts and presented
beautifully decorated copies of his music and poetry to his
noble patrons. These copies make Machaut one of the first
important composers whose works have survived. The decline
of the church in the fourteenth century is reflected in
Machaut’s output, which consists mainly of courtly love songs
for one to four performers.
① 신학을 공부한 후 일생 동안 평민을 위해 봉사했다.
② 1323년경 Bohemia 왕이 되어 전쟁에 참여하였다.
③ Reims에 사는 동안에는 교회 활동을 하지 않았다.
④ 귀족 후원자들에게 자신의 음악과 시의 사본을 주었다.
⑤ 14세기 교회의 부흥이 그의 작품 속에 반영되어 있다.
38. Bloodhound Car에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
What’s faster than a speeding bullet and isn’t named
Superman? The answer is the Bloodhound Car, or soon will
be. Now being built in England, it is expected to be completed
within a year. Powered by three engines, it is designed to go
1,050 miles per hour (mph), which would blast past the current
land speed record of 763 mph, set in 1997. It is 13 meters long,
1.5 meters wide and 2 meters tall, and weighs 6.4 tons. Due to
its enormous weight, it won’t be the quickest car in the world
from 0 to 100 mph, as it will take 15 seconds. But after that, it
will only take 25 seconds to go from 100 to 1,000 mph! The
Bloodhound Car is scheduled to make its record-breaking
attempt in 2013 at the Hakskeen Pan Desert in South Africa.
① 현재 England에서 제작되고 있다.
② 시속 1,050마일로 주행이 가능하도록 설계되어 있다.
③ 출발 후 시속 100마일에 도달하는 시간이 세계에서 가장 짧을 것이다.
④ 시속 100마일에서 1,000마일로 높이는 데 25초가 걸릴 것이다.
⑤ Hakskeen Pan Desert에서 기록 경신에 도전할 예정이다.
[39~40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. Here is a surprise for you: Being happy means that you
realize that there are times that you will be unhappy and
recognize that life sometimes stinks. What is uplifting in those
times is appreciating life and facing the challenges that come
with it, realizing that you are facing challenges fellow humans
have also faced. We are not saying you should lower your
expectations for your so-called perfect life or downsize your
goals; we just believe that if you can align your expectations
with reality a little more by expecting to face challenges, you
will be better off in the end. There is an interesting biological
reinforcement for this notion, too: Your levels of C-reactive
protein (a marker of damaging inflammation) have been shown
to be higher when you have expectations that are unattainable.
* align: (일직선으로) 맞추다 ** inflammation: 염증
① 역경을 예상하면서 기대치를 현실에 맞춰야 행복해진다.
② 완벽한 삶은 고난을 극복하는 과정에서 찾아온다.
③ 타인의 입장을 이해하는 것이 행복의 출발점이다.
④ 신체적 고통을 치유하려면 마음의 평화를 찾아야 한다.
⑤ 행복하려면 큰 목표를 세우고 끊임없이 도전해야 한다.
40. The Greek philosopher Socrates observed, “The unexamined
life is not worth living.” For most people, however, reflection
and self-examination do not come naturally. As much as any
other kind of thinking, reflection requires solitude. Distraction
and reflection simply do not mix. It is not the kind of thing
you can do well near a television, while the phone is ringing,
or with children in the same room. One of the reasons I have
been able to accomplish much and keep growing personally is
that I have not only set aside time to reflect, but I have
separated myself from distractions for short blocks of time:
thirty minutes in the spa; an hour outside on a rock in my
backyard; or a few hours in a comfortable chair in my office.
The place does not matter ⎯ as long as you remove yourself
from distractions and interruptions.
① 자기성찰을 위해 방해받지 않는 혼자만의 시간이 필요하다.
② 명상과 자기성찰을 통해 자연으로 돌아가야 한다.
③ 현대 문명의 다양한 혜택들은 자유로운 사색에 방해가 된다.
④ 장소에 따라 명상과 자기성찰에 필요한 시간이 달라진다.
⑤ 자기성찰은 고대 그리스 철학에 대한 탐구로부터 시작된다.
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. Virtuoso violinist Pinchas Zukerman was giving a master
class to a group of young artists who had come to the Aspen
Music Festival from all over the world. The auditorium was
filled with aspiring artists, distinguished teachers, and
well-known performers; the atmosphere was competitive and
electric. As each performer played, Zukerman offered friendly
advice and encouragement, invariably picking up his own
violin to demonstrate finer points of technique. The last
musician performed brilliantly. When the applause subsided,
Zukerman complimented the artist, then picked up his own
violin, tucked it under his chin, paused a long moment, and
then, without playing a note or uttering a word, he placed the
instrument back in its case. The audience responded with
deafening applause, in recognition of this master musician
who could pay so gracious a compliment.
* virtuoso: 대가, 거장 ** subside: 잠잠해지다
① A Long Road to Perfection
② Zukerman’s Rise to Fame
③ Great Musicians from Aspen
④ A Master’s Extraordinary Praise
⑤ Violinists: Technique or Passion?
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
42. Whenever you stand on a scale in your bathroom or place a
melon on a scale at the grocery store, you are measuring
weight. An object’s weight is the force exerted on it by
gravity, usually the earth’s gravity. When you stand on a
bathroom scale, the scale measures just how much upward
force it must exert on you in order to keep you from moving
downward toward the earth’s center. As in most scales you will
encounter, the bathroom scale uses a spring to provide this
upward support. If you are stationary, you are not accelerating,
so your downward weight and the upward force from the
spring must cancel one another; that is, they must be equal in
magnitude but opposite in direction so that they sum to zero
net force.
① Selecting a Good Scale
② The Best Way to Measure Your Weight
③ Weight: Two Forces in Balance
④ The Earth’s Gravity: A Mysterious Power
⑤ How to Control Your Weight
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
A few years ago we purchased a brand-new camper van.
Not long after we bought our camper, a friend of ours
asked if her family could borrow it. We were not too
interested in loaning out our spotless camper, so we
declined.
(A) That in itself would not have been so bad had it not been
for the mice. Mice were attracted by the food and they
shredded all the curtains, screens, and cushions. Had we
let the friend borrow the camper, she would have
discovered the boxes before the mice did.
(B) This happened in the fall, and we stored the camper in our
backyard all that winter. In the spring my husband and I
were setting it up to prepare for a trip.
(C) We were very surprised to find that we had left cookie
boxes in the camper over the winter. We had moved and
had a baby that previous summer and fall, and cleaning
out the camper had been overlooked.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
But when ice forms, they can walk out to a hole near
where the seals are swimming, then sit and wait for a seal
to pop its head up to breathe.
Across the Arctic, polar bear numbers are in decline. If the
climate continues to warm at the current rate, the bears could
disappear completely in the next hundred years. ( ① ) But
for now, if you visit Churchill, Canada in October or
November, it’s almost a sure thing you’ll see a polar bear in
the wild. ( ② ) Churchill, population 914, sits on the edge of
Hudson Bay at the point where the ice first forms every
winter. And these bears love ice. ( ③ ) Their fondness for
frozen seas is simple: Ice means they can eat their favorite
meal ― seals. ( ④ ) Although polar bears are powerful
marine mammals, able to swim a hundred miles or more
nonstop, they’re too slow to catch a seal in open water. ( ⑤ )
Or as a bear might put it, “Dinner is served.”
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Behavioral evidence for separate types of taste receptors
comes from studies of the following type: Soak your tongue
for 15 seconds in a sour solution, such as unsweetened
lemon juice. Then try tasting some other sour solution, such
as dilute vinegar. You will find that the second solution
tastes less sour than usual. Depending on the concentrations
of the lemon juice and vinegar, the second solution may not
taste sour at all. This phenomenon, called adaptation,
reflects the fatigue of receptors sensitive to sour tastes.
Now try tasting something salty, sweet, or bitter. These
substances taste about the same as usual. In short, you
experience little cross-adaptation ― reduced response to
one taste after exposure to another. Evidently, the sour
receptors are different from the other taste receptors.
Similarly, you can show that salt receptors are different
from the others and so forth.
The fact that the intensity of a taste is (A) after trying
the same taste, but not after trying a different taste, serves
as evidence for the existence of (B) receptors for
different tastes.
(A) (B)
① increased …… adaptive
② increased …… identical
③ measured …… sensitive
④ decreased …… distinct
⑤ decreased …… collective
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8
8
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
My sister, Tara, was the quiet one in the family. She was
not as adventurous as my brother and I. She never excelled at
school or sports. Of course, I loved my sister, but, at times,
that was not so easy to do. She seldom made eye contact
with me. When we ran into each other at school, (a) she
sometimes pretended not to recognize me.
One day, my father’s job forced us to move to a new
neighborhood. The nurse at our new school, Emerson, gave
us ear and eye exams, our first ever. I aced the tests ― “Eagle
eyes and elephant ears,” the nurse said ― but Tara struggled
to read the eye chart. (b) She declared Tara severely
shortsighted and she had to get glasses. When the glasses
were ready, we all went downtown to pick them up. The first
time she tried them on, she kept moving her head around and
up and down. “What’s the matter?” I asked. “You can see that
tree over there?” she said, pointing at a sycamore tree about a
hundred feet away. I nodded. (c) She sobbed, “I can see not
just the branches, but each little leaf.” Tara burst into tears.
On the way home, she kept seeing for the first time all
these things that most everyone else had stopped noticing.
She read street signs and billboards aloud. She pointed out
sparrows sitting on the telephone wires. At home, Tara
insisted that I try on her glasses. I put them on, and the world
turned into fuzzy, unfocused shapes. I took a few steps and
banged my knee on the coffee table. It was at that very
moment that I truly understood Tara for the first time. I
realized why (d) she did not like to go exploring, or why she
did not recognize me at school.
Tara loved seeing the world clearly. Not long after she got
her glasses, she decided she wanted to be an artist. She
started compulsively drawing and painting all the wondrous
things she was discovering. (e) Her first painting of the
sycamore tree is still her favorite. Today, she is an art teacher
at Emerson, where she tries to bring the best out of each
individual student.
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Seeing with Inner Eyes
② Sisters in a Flood of Tears
③ Wearing the Wrong Glasses
④ A New World Through Glasses
⑤ Alternative Ways to Be an Art Teacher
47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
48. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 화자(I)는 아버지의 직장 때문에 이사하게 되었다.
② Tara는 시력검사에서 근시판정을 받았다.
③ 화자(I)는 Tara의 안경을 쓰고 잘 볼 수 있었다.
④ Tara는 안경을 쓰게 된 후 화가가 되고 싶다는 마음을 먹었다.
⑤ 현재 Tara는 Emerson 학교의 미술교사이다.
[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
I observe the moon wherever I go. What phase is it in, I
wonder? When will it reach the full moon phase? Now
imagine what happened to me recently when I was teaching
in Australia, 12,000 miles from my hometown in North
America. Shortly after my arrival, seeing that the skies were
cloudy, I checked the newspaper for a weather report.
Typically, the weather page also gives times for sunrise and
sunset as well as moonrise and moonset.
(B)
Picture my surprise when I discovered that the illustrations
in the newspaper were, by my experience, wrong. The
waxing moon appeared to be illuminated on the left side
rather than the right side as I had always known it to be. “I
must call the newspaper,” I thought. But I continued to study
the images in the newspaper and then consulted a globe.
* wax: (점점) 커지다
(C)
The point is that often we do not see things as they are.
Instead, we see things as we are. That is why it is necessary
in science to have many people making many observations
of the same phenomenon. I am sure that to people in
Australia, .
(D)
When I imagined myself standing on a spot in the southern
hemisphere, the answer came to me. Here, indeed, south of
the equator, the waxing moon appears to be on the left. Try
this in your imagination, and you will see it, too.
49. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① solar energy would play an important role
② the waxing of the moon would be easier to notice
③ the weather in North America appears better than it is
④ the scientific discoveries in North America are universal
⑤ the moon in North America would seem strange as well

1
8
①
②
③
④
⑤
2012학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 문을 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① delighted ② relieved ③ indifferent
④ worried ⑤ frightened
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 신학기 수강신청 요령
② 기숙사 이용 수칙 변경
③ 봄방학 캠프 신청 안내
④ 도난 상황 발생 시 대응 수칙
⑤ 봄방학 중 기숙사 도난 방지 방법
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 에어컨 켜기 ② 선풍기 가져오기
③ 에어컨 온도 낮추기 ④ 선풍기 수리하기
⑤ 냉방 기준 변경 신청하기
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 차액으로 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $5 ② $6 ③ $7 ④ $9 ⑤ $10
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 먼지의 유해성을 경고하려고
② 청소기가 고장 난 상태를 설명하려고
③ 다양한 마루 바닥재를 소개하려고
④ 최신 청소기 제품을 홍보하려고
⑤ 이사 갈 아파트의 청소를 의뢰하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 지하철 노선 알려주기 ② 자동차 수리 맡기기
③ 차로 박물관까지 태워주기 ④ 남대문시장 안내하기
⑤ 외국인 친구 소개해주기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을
고르시오.
① 수영장 ② 약국 ③ 은행
④ 보건실 ⑤ 식당
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 우체국 직원 - 고객 ② 버스 운전사 - 승객
③ 관광 가이드 - 관광객 ④ 호텔 직원 - 투숙객
⑤ 식당 종업원 - 지배인
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to help his brother ② to fix the computer
③ to design the poster ④ to put up the posters
⑤ to mail out the invitations
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 휴대전화를
고르시오.
12. 다음을 듣고, Atlantic Cruise Tour에 관한 내용과 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 첫 방문지는 수영이나 스노클링을 할 수 있는 해변이다.
② 오전 11시에는 Queens 섬을 방문할 예정이다.
③ 점심식사 이후에 돌고래 쇼가 예정되어 있다.
④ Coral 섬에서는 사진촬영을 할 수 없다.
⑤ 버스는 오전 8시 정각에 출발할 예정이다.
제 3 교시
2 외국어(영어) 영역
2
8
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① It’s totally none of your business.
② Today I’d like to hear about your childhood.
③ The book industry has also declined drastically.
④ It’s a great honor to have you here in my office.
⑤ This is my first time visiting the Statue of Liberty.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Thank you for buying my old furniture.
② I’ll post an ad on the website right away.
③ Don’t forget to keep in touch after you move.
④ I wish you luck in getting into the university.
⑤ I’m really happy I can finally get a new fridge.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I think the newspaper is more interesting.
② I know exactly what he’s going to order.
③ Let’s cancel their reservation tomorrow.
④ I can’t wait to taste his dishes.
⑤ Let’s keep our fingers crossed.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Angelina가 Scott에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Angelina:
① It’s a good thing that you came early today.
② You have to pay a fine for parking illegally.
③ You should answer the phone call immediately.
④ Don’t feel bad since you learned a good lesson.
⑤ I told you that you should buy a new cell phone.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
So, you’re ready to add a new member, a furry one, to
your family. But now you have one more decision to
make: What kind of dog should I get? Here are some tips
to consider when choosing a dog that is right for you.
First, pick a dog that fits your home. Bring a big one into
your house only if you can give him a lot of space.
Second, don’t buy a shaggy dog if you’re allergic. Getting
a non-shedding dog is a good idea if you’re worried about
loose hairs or your kids’ allergies. Third, pick a
mild-mannered puppy that is likely to be more forgiving
and protective of his little owners. Keep these in mind,
and you’ll enjoy having the new member at home.
* shaggy: 털북숭이의
① 애완견 훈련 방법에 관해 안내하려고
② 애완견 유기의 문제점에 관해 지적하려고
③ 애완견 위생 관리 요령에 관해 설명하려고
④ 애완견을 기르는 어려움에 관해 알려주려고
⑤ 애완견 선택 시 고려사항에 관해 조언하려고
19. 밑줄 친 She[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Switching on the light in the nursery, Evelyn found her
baby daughter, Julie, tossing feverishly and giving out odd
little cries. ① She put her hand against Julie’s cheeks. They
were burning. With an exclamation, she followed ② her
baby’s arm down under the cover until she found her little
hand. The whole thumb was swollen to the wrist and in the
center was a little inflamed sore. ③ She rushed to the
phone. Doctor Foulke, the family physician, sounded upset at
being called out of bed at midnight. She ran back to the
nursery to check on her daughter. Taking a closer look, she
found ④ her thumb to be somewhat more swollen. ⑤ She
knelt beside the bed and began smoothing back Julie’s hair
over and over.
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
You have to pay close attention to someone’s normal
pattern in order to notice a deviation from it when he or she
lies. Sometimes the variation is as (A) subtle / subtly as a
pause. Other times it is obvious and abrupt. I recently saw a
news interview with an acquaintance (B) who / whom I was
certain was going to lie about a few particularly sensitive
issues, and lie she did. During most of her interview she was
calm and direct, but when she started lying, her manner
changed dramatically: she threw her head back, laughed in
‘disbelief,’ and shook her head back and forth. It is true that
the questions (C) dealt / dealing with very personal issues,
but I have found that in general, no matter how touchy the
question, if a person is telling the truth his or her manner
will not change significantly or abruptly.
(A) (B) (C)
① subtle …… who …… dealt
② subtle …… who …… dealing
③ subtle …… whom …… dealt
④ subtly …… who …… dealt
⑤ subtly …… whom …… dealing
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Fieldwork is the hallmark of cultural anthropology. It is the
way we explore and learn about the vast ① detailed intricacy
of human culture and individual behavior. And it is,
importantly, the way ② in which most cultural anthropologists
earn and maintain their professional standing. Some of the
early personal accounts of anthropologists in the field make
fieldwork ③ sound exciting, adventuresome, certainly exotic,
sometimes easy. Malinowski, the classic anthropological
fieldworker, describes the early stages of fieldwork as ‘a strange,
sometimes unpleasant, sometimes intensely interesting
adventure which soon ④ adopts quite a natural course.’ He
goes on to describe his daily routine of strolling through the
village ⑤ observed the intimate details of family life, and as
he tells it, such observations seem possible and accessible.
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Albert Einstein sought relentlessly for a so-called unified
field theory ― a theory capable of describing nature’s forces
within a single, all-encompassing, coherent framework. ①
Einstein was not motivated by the things we often associate
with scientific undertakings, such as trying to explain this or
that piece of experimental data. ② Instead, he was driven by
a passionate belief that the deepest understanding of the
universe would reveal its truest wonder: the simplicity and
power of the principles on which it is based. ③ As in
Einstein’s formulation, the two theories underlying the
tremendous progress of physics were mutually incompatible.
④ Einstein wanted to illuminate the workings of the
universe with a clarity never before achieved, allowing us
all to stand in awe of its sheer beauty and elegance. ⑤ In
his day, however, Einstein never realized this dream, mainly
because a number of essential features of matter and the
forces of nature were either unknown or, at best, poorly
understood.
23. 다음 글에서 지도자에 관하여 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장
적절한 것은?
Effective leaders set the tone for the entire organization.
It’s not a matter of knowing more than everyone else. There
are plenty of leaders who are not the biggest experts in their
companies. But it does mean working hard, something anyone
can do. Be the first person to arrive at the workplace and be
the last one to leave. If you can do that, you will already be
light years ahead of most managers in the respect you will
gain from your team members. Apply the same principle to all
your routine activities. If you expect your sales force to make
50 calls each day, make 100 calls yourself. It is not rocket
science. It is just basic ‘lead by example’ management. No
one can really discredit leaders who are the hardest-working
individuals in their organizations.
① 부서별 경쟁을 활성화하라.
② 열심히 일하고 솔선수범하라.
③ 전문성과 유연성을 겸비하라.
④ 중간 관리자의 역할을 존중하라.
⑤ 친화력으로 직장 내 화합을 도모하라.
[24～28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. Science is making the future, and nations are busy
making future scientists. The more science that emerges
from this investment, the greater the need for us to follow
the gist of the science with sufficient understanding. In
other words, if we the ordinary people are to keep pace
with science, we need more science writers, and more
science writing that is clear, wise and eloquent, and that
demands to be read. People often feel excluded from
science, convinced that it takes an advanced degree to
understand what scientists do. As a result, they defensively
shrug off the whole business as an exclusive realm of little
relevance to their lives. One of the surest cures for
scientific is great scientific literature,
writing that does not merely translate technical terms into
plain English or explain complicated ideas simply.
① intolerance ② immorality ③ illiteracy
④ irregularity ⑤ manipulation
25. . If I assign fifty students a
five-page essay on the subject of why the Roman Empire
fell, most of them are likely to say it was a combination
of economic and social causes ultimately leading to a
weakening of the frontiers. This would be a fine answer,
but after reading forty-five papers all saying the same
thing, I’m ready for a change. If you can take a different
angle from the rest of the class in a paper, you’re more
likely to impress your professors. But here’s the tricky
part ― being different is risky, and it only works if you
back up your argument very well. If you choose to argue
that Rome fell solely because Christianity weakened the
fighting spirit of the Romans, you will need persuasive
reasoning and arguments against any potential objections.
① Variety is the spice of life
② The essence of writing is in its brevity
③ Don’t fix what is not broken
④ The pen is mightier than the sword
⑤ Rome was not built in a day
26. Consumers of different age groups obviously have very
different needs and wants. Although people who belong to
the same age group differ in many other ways, they do tend
to share a set of values and common cultural experiences
that they carry throughout life. In some cases, marketers
initially develop a product to attract one age group and then
try to . That is what the
high-octane energy drink Reddox does. The company
aggressively introduced it in bars, nightclubs, and gyms to
the product’s core audience of young people. Over time, it
became popular in other contexts, and the company began
to sponsor the PGA European Tour to expand its reach to
older golfers. It also hands out free cans to commuters, cab
drivers, and car rental agencies to promote the drink as a
way to stay alert on the road. [3점]
① raise its retail price
② broaden its appeal later on
③ upgrade it for other age groups
④ increase demand by limiting supply
⑤ create a positive image via the mass media
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4
8
27. is aggravated by the
overabundance of information at our disposal. While this
is obvious enough in some realms ― for example,
consider how much information is potentially relevant for
estimating the value of Microsoft stock ― even when the
information set seems less cluttered, information overload,
a state of confusion and decision avoidance, can still
occur. In one experiment, shoppers in a supermarket
were presented with free samples of jams and jellies. In
the first treatment, a small selection was available for
tasting; in the second, a large selection was available.
While everyone likes the idea of abundant choice, and
indeed the table with the greater selection attracted larger
crowds, it was the table with fewer samples that led to
the most sales. The likely reason is that the large
selection led to information overload, the feeling that the
decision was too complicated for immediate action.
① Difficulty in assessing information
② The shortage of trustworthy informants
③ Mental fatigue caused by misleading information
④ Indeterminacy arising from indirect information
⑤ The complexity of altering consumer behavior
28. The essence of science is to uncover patterns and
regularities in nature by finding algorithmic compressions
of observations. But the raw data of observation rarely
exhibit explicit regularities. Instead we find that nature’s
order is hidden from us, it is written in code. To make
progress in science we need to crack the cosmic code, to
dig beneath the raw data and uncover the hidden order. I
often liken fundamental science to doing a crossword
puzzle. Experiment and observation provide us with
clues, but the clues are cryptic, and require some
considerable ingenuity to solve. With each new solution,
. As with a crossword, so
with the physical universe, we find that the solutions to
independent clues link together in a consistent and
supportive way to form a coherent unity, so that the
more clues we solve, the easier we find it to fill in the
missing features. [3점]
* cryptic: 비밀스러운
① the depth of scientific experiments keeps us in awe
② we glimpse a bit more of the overall pattern of nature
③ the code-breaking process becomes increasingly mysterious
④ the regularity of nature is revealed in its entirety to
the observer
⑤ we crack the cosmic codes one by one, replacing an
old solution with the new one
[29～30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
29. Like an artist who pursues both enduring excellence and
shocking creativity, great companies foster a (A)
between continuity and change. On the one hand, they
adhere to the principles that produced success in the first
place, yet on the other hand, they continually evolve,
modifying their approach with creative improvements and
intelligent adaptation. But the point here is not as simple as
“some companies failed because they did not change.”
Companies that change constantly but without any consistent
rationale will (B) just as surely as those that change
not at all. There is nothing inherently wrong with
adhering to specific practices and strategies. But you should
comprehend the underlying why behind those practices, and
thereby see when to keep them and when to change them.
(A) (B)
① tension …… collapse
② tension …… prosper
③ balance …… flourish
④ divergence …… succeed
⑤ divergence …… perish
30. Since most of you are working on a word processor, it
seems silly to spend too much time on spelling. Your
word-processing program will spell check items for you.
(A) , spelling is not a completely lost art. There
are words that are not in the spell checker’s dictionary.
Also, your spell checker will not help you if you
misspell a word and mistakenly turn it into another word.
(B) , when you write ‘lightening’ instead of
‘lightning,’ the program will not recognize the error. So, get
in the habit of rereading your work and looking up words
that the spell checker does not pick up. You need to
develop the skill of knowing when words look wrong.
Never hand something in until you have checked it.
(A) (B)
① However …… For example
② However …… Therefore
③ That is …… Similarly
④ In addition …… For example
⑤ In addition …… Therefore
31. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
It was the day of the audition. I hadn’t slept a wink the
previous night. Strangely, I wasn’t tired. It could have been the
adrenaline pumping through my veins, or maybe it was the
five cups of coffee I drank that morning. Either way, I couldn’t
sit still. I kept getting up and down from my chair, pacing
around the room. A dozen thoughts went through my head.
Would I remember my lines? Would I be able to display the
right emotions? I kept telling myself to relax but the butterflies
in my stomach had an intention of their own. When my name
was called, I slowly stepped in front of the judges. Their gaze
fell heavy upon me. My mind drew a complete blank.
① jealous ② satisfied ③ sympathetic
④ angry ⑤ nervous
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
32. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
From the twelve million articles on Wikipedia to the
millions of free secondhand goods offered on websites,
we are discovering that money is not the only motivator.
(A) Altruism / Selfishness has always existed, but the Web
gives it a platform where the actions of individuals can have
global impact. In a sense, zero-cost distribution has turned
sharing into an industry. From the point of view of the
monetary economy it all looks free ― indeed, it looks like
unfair competition ― but that says more about our shortsighted
ways of measuring value than it does about the worth of what
is created. The incentives to (B) share / dominate can range
from reputation and attention to less measurable factors such
as expression, fun, satisfaction, and simply self-interest.
Sometimes the giving is (C) conscious / unintentional . You
give information to Google when you have a public website,
whether you intend to or not, and you give aluminum cans
to the homeless guy who collects them from the recycling
bin, even if that is not what you meant to do.
(A) (B) (C)
① Altruism …… share …… conscious
② Altruism …… share …… unintentional
③ Altruism …… dominate …… conscious
④ Selfishness …… share …… conscious
⑤ Selfishness …… dominate …… unintentional
33. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Life is full of hazards. Disease, enemies and starvation are
always menacing primitive man. Experience teaches him
that medicinal herbs, valor, the most strenuous labor, often
come to naught, yet normally he wants to ① survive and
enjoy the good things of existence. Faced with this problem,
he takes to any method that seems ② adapted to his ends.
Often his ways appear incredibly ③ crude to us moderns
until we remember how our next-door neighbor acts in like
emergencies. When medical science pronounces him ④ curable,
he will not resign himself to fate but runs to the nearest
quack who holds out hope of recovery. His urge for
self-preservation will not down, nor will that of the illiterate
peoples of the world, and in that overpowering will to live is
anchored the belief in supernaturalism, which is absolutely
⑤ universal among known peoples, past and present.
* quack: 돌팔이 의사
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. Some species seem to have a stronger influence than others
on their ecosystem. Take away the sea stars along the northwest
coast of the United States, for instance, and the ecosystem
changes dramatically; in the absence of these sea stars, their
favorite prey, mussels, takes over and makes it hard for other
species that used to live there. Sea stars are known as
keystone species, because as top predators they determine
ecosystem structure by their eating habits. If you chop down
an aspen tree by a beaver pond, not much will happen; but if
you take away a beaver, a wetland might dry out, changing
the kinds of plants that live there and the animals that rely on
them. Because beavers exert their influence by physically
altering the landscape, they are known as ecosystem engineers.
① ways of cultivating ecosystem engineers
② altering the ecosystem along the U.S. coasts
③ species playing a major role in the ecosystem
④ causes of population reduction in some species
⑤ necessity of protecting endangered species in wetlands
35. Despite the fact that ancient civilizations relied upon the
apparent motion of celestial bodies through the sky to
determine seasons, months, and years, we know little about
the details of timekeeping in prehistoric eras. But wherever
we turn up records and artifacts, we usually discover that in
every culture, some people were preoccupied with measuring
the passage of time. Ice-age hunters in Europe over 20,000
years ago scratched lines and made holes in sticks and
bones, possibly counting the days between phases of the
moon. Five thousand years ago, Sumerians in the
Tigris-Euphrates valley had a calendar that divided the year
into 30 day months, and the day into 12 periods. We have
no written records of Stonehenge, built over 4,000 years ago
in England, but its alignments show its purposes apparently
included the determination of seasonal or celestial events.
* celestial: 천체의
① contrast in timekeeping between ancient and modern society
② significance of making a calendar in human history
③ astronomy and the western religious rituals
④ measuring time in ancient civilizations
⑤ observing stars in prehistoric eras
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
The above graph shows the number of professionals per
1,000 high school participants and the median lifetime
earnings for the given six sports in the United States in 2008.
① Basketball had the highest median lifetime earnings and
hockey had the highest number of professionals per 1,000
high school participants. ② Soccer had the lowest median
lifetime earnings and the lowest number of professionals per
1,000 high school participants. ③ Golf and baseball, ranked
second and third in median lifetime earnings respectively, both
had median lifetime earnings above 6 million dollars. ④ The
only two sports that had median lifetime earnings less than
4 million dollars were football and soccer. ⑤ Except for
hockey, which had more than 4 professionals per 1,000 high
school participants, the remaining five sports all had less than
1.5 professionals per 1,000 high school participants.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6
8
37. Sveta Bogoroditsa에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
The church ‘Sveta Bogoroditsa’ (‘Holy Virgin’) in
Karlovo has a handsome profile with its blue and white
bell tower. The bell tower is relatively new, from 1897, but
the church building, as the inscription above the western
entrance tells us, dates from 1851. Before they began
constructing this new building in 1847, the older church of
the Holy Virgin had burned down in 1813. This latter
church, about which little is known, is believed by some to
have been built already at the end of the fifteenth century,
at the time of the founding of the little town of Karli-ova,
later Karlovo. In any case, the names of priests serving in
the church have been preserved from the eighteenth century
on. Although the construction was completed in 1851, the
events of the Crimean War and lack of funds delayed the
furnishing of the church, and its consecration did not take
place until May 20, 1858.
* consecration: 헌당(식)
① 윤곽선이 아름다우며 흑색 종탑을 가지고 있다.
② 교회 건물보다 먼저 세워진 종탑이 있다.
③ Karli-ova 마을이 세워질 무렵 화재로 타 버렸다.
④ 봉직한 사제들의 이름이 18세기부터 보존되어 있다.
⑤ 1851년 건물 완공과 동시에 모든 비품을 갖추었다.
38. Edwin Armstrong에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Edwin Armstrong, who first discovered and developed FM
radio in the 1920s and early 1930s, is often considered the
most prolific and influential inventor in radio history. He
alone understood the impact of De Forest’s vacuum tube, and
he used it to invent an amplifying system that enabled radio
receivers to pick up distant signals. Armstrong’s innovations
rendered useless the enormous alternators used for generating
power in early radio transmitters. In 1922, he sold a ‘super’
version of his circuit to Radio Corporation of America (RCA)
for $200,000 and sixty thousand shares of RCA stock,
making him a millionaire as well as RCA’s largest private
stockholder. Armstrong also worked on the major problem of
radio reception ― electrical interference. Between 1930 and
1933, the inventor filed five patents on FM.
* alternator: 교류발전기
① 라디오 역사상 가장 영향력 있는 발명가로 여겨지곤 한다.
② 전파 수신기로 하여금 원거리 신호를 잡게 해주는 증폭 장치를
발명했다.
③ 그의 혁신적 장치들로 인하여 초기 전파 송신기에 사용되던
거대한 교류발전기가 필요 없어졌다.
④ 1922년에 자신의 고성능 회로를 RCA에 기증했다.
⑤ 1930년부터 1933년 사이에, FM에 관한 5개의 특허를 출원했다.
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. Despite what you might think, luck isn’t a matter of fate
or destiny, according to research by psychologist Richard
Wiseman. Instead, it’s a result of the way lucky people
think and act ― which means that anyone can learn to be
lucky! For instance, Wiseman found that lucky people
always take notice of what’s going on around them and stay
open to new experiences and opportunities. Meanwhile,
unlucky people tend to be tenser and too focused on certain
tasks, which stops them from noticing opportunities they
aren’t explicitly looking for. So, next time you’re heading
to a party, don’t go in with a goal in mind (no matter how
much you want to attract someone). Instead, take things as
they come and you never know what might happen. You
could even make some awesome new friends.
① 열린 사고와 행동은 행운을 불러온다.
② 열정과 몰입은 행운을 부르는 지름길이다.
③ 행동하기 전에 생각하는 습관이 필요하다.
④ 운명에 도전하면 좋은 기회가 오기 마련이다.
⑤ 새로운 친구들을 사귀다 보면 이상형을 만나기 쉽다.
40. In a study conducted by Karen O’Quinn and Joel
Aronoff, participants were asked to negotiate with a seller
over the purchase price of a piece of art. Toward the end
of the negotiation, the seller made a final offer in one of
two ways. Half of the time he said that he would accept
$6,000, while the other half of the time he gave the same
final price but also added a little humor (“Well, my final
offer is $6,000, and I’ll throw in my pet frog”). Those few
moments of attempted humor had a large effect, as
participants made a much greater compromise in their
purchase price when they heard about the frog. It seemed
that the brief humorous comment momentarily put the
participants in a good mood and encouraged them to be
more giving.
① 상대를 존중하면 가격 협상이 쉽게 이루어진다.
② 예상 구매자의 성향파악이 중요하다.
③ 거래의 성사를 위해 적절한 가격 제시가 필요하다.
④ 유머를 사용하면 협상을 유리하게 이끌 수 있다.
⑤ 신중한 협상 자세는 이익을 극대화시킨다.
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. The green revolution was a mixed blessing. Over time
farmers came to rely heavily on broadly adapted, high-yield
crops to the exclusion of varieties adapted to local
conditions. Monocropping vast fields with the same
genetically uniform seeds helps boost yield and meet
immediate hunger needs. Yet high-yield varieties are also
genetically weaker crops that require expensive chemical
fertilizers and toxic pesticides. The same holds true for
high-yield livestock breeds, which often require expensive
feed and medicinal care to survive in foreign climates. The
drive to increase production is pushing out local varieties,
diluting livestock’s genetic diversity in the process. As a
result, the world’s food supply has become largely
dependent on a shrinking list of breeds designed for
maximum yield. In short, in our focus on increasing the
amount of food we produce today, we have accidentally put
ourselves at risk for food shortages in the future.
① Pros and Cons of Using Chemical Fertilizers
② Is Genetic Diversity a Blessing in Disguise?
③ Who Will Conquer Famine, Farmers or Scientists?
④ Livestock Diseases: A Never-ending Struggle
⑤ Farming Uniform Breeds: A Double-edged Sword
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
42. About twenty years ago, Time magazine described a
study by a psychologist of people who had lost their jobs
three times due to plant closings. The writers were amazed
by what they discovered. They expected the people being
laid off to be beaten down and discouraged. Instead they
found them to be incredibly resilient. Why was that? They
concluded that people who had weathered repeated
adversity had learned to bounce back. People who had lost
a job and found a new one twice before were much better
prepared to deal with adversity than someone who had
always worked at the same place and had never faced
adversity. It may sound ironic, but if you have experienced
a lot of failure, you are actually in a better position to
achieve success than people who have not.
① Setbacks: Not All Bad
② A Shortcut Toward Happiness
③ Job Satisfaction vs. Job Security
④ Searching for the Causes of Human Despair
⑤ Adversity and Failure: An Unhealthy Combination
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
One reason why the definitions of words have
changed over time is simply because of their misuse.
There are a growing number of examples where the
incorrect meaning of relatively commonplace language
has become more widespread than the original intention
or definition.
(A) Now, imagine that an angry customer sent you a letter
about the service he received in one of your stores. If
your reply is that you ‘perused his letter,’ he is likely
to get even more angry than he was before.
(B) The word ‘peruse’ is one of them. Most people think
that to ‘peruse’ something means to ‘scan or skim it
quickly, without paying much attention.’ In fact, this is
the exact opposite of what ‘peruse’ really means: ‘to
study or read something carefully, in detail.’
(C) But the word has been misused so often by so many
people, that this second sense of it ― the exact
opposite of what it actually means ― has finally been
accepted as a secondary definition and as far as most
people know, it is the only definition.
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
The smartest of our deep ancestors would have stored
their excess meat in the bodies and minds of others
(not just their own kin).
Evolutionary psychologists have suggested that the
absence of any effective form of refrigeration was critical
to our early moral development. Let’s say that you’re an
early humanoid hunting and gathering on the African
savannah and you strike it lucky. ( ① ) You come
across a huge beast and you manage to kill it. ( ② ) It
yields far more meat than anyone involved in the hunt or
their families can possibly consume. ( ③ ) How do you
get the most benefit of your excess meat without a fridge,
or anywhere to store it? ( ④ ) Provided those benefiting
from your gift could possibly repay your generosity in the
future, that was the best thing you could do with excess
meat. ( ⑤ ) Groups of early humans who developed
stable relationships and practiced this sort of mutual
altruism were in a better position to prosper and multiply.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
A bumper sticker reading “Don’t Believe Everything
You Think” is placed on the edge of the whiteboard in
Greene’s office. It represents the underlying message of
the book he is writing. An analogy carried throughout
the book compares the moral brain to a camera with
automatic settings for taking a picture of a mountain or
an indoor portrait or a close-up of a flower, and manual
settings for unusual conditions or when we want a
nonstandard artistic effect. Greene believes emotions and
intuitions are the auto settings for our morality while
reasoning is the manual mode.
We need our intuitions to make the millions of quick
judgments that fill our lives from day to day or else we
could not function. But they are not always trustworthy
moral indicators, since they were set to handle problems
deep in our evolutionary past and are often useless for
the newer complexities of the modern world. We need to
rely on our manual settings, the reasoning sections of our
brain, for more complex or novel situations, Greene says.
󰀻
According to Greene’s view on the moral brain,
emotions and intuitions make our lives easier in making
(A) decisions, but we need to rely on (B)
for more complex problems.
(A) (B)
① unusual …… conscience
② everyday …… reasoning
③ difficult …… logic
④ moral …… creativity
⑤ habitual …… imagination
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8
8
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
I grew up in a small town in northern California,
between wide-open ranchland and dark forests, feeling at
home in two places: the wild land and books. I read
constantly, hungrily, and without direction, collecting a
strange stew of facts and ideas about the rest of the
world. I longed for a world away from what I knew
and outrageously outside my means.
(B)
The important lesson I learned at (a) Billups ― the world
was a lot bigger than I had imagined it to be ― was a little
painful. It meant I was a lot smaller than I’d realized. I
went on to attend a state university and I began to write
about my disappearing dreams and new dreams, about
wishing and disappointment and feeling small. One day a
professor (b) there took hold of me and said, “You’re a
writer.” Until then, I hadn’t really known. I had to figure
out who I was not going to be before I could get on to
who I was. The lesson from Billups lay below the surface,
but when I began to write, it rose like flowers and bloomed
into words and stories and books, and me.
(C)
One morning I came across a catalog for a college
preparatory school called Billups Academy. (c) It had a
summer program and offered scholarships for high
school students to ‘deepen and extend their intellectual,
aesthetic, and moral interests.’ I applied for and won a
scholarship. Billups wasn’t just another school ― it was
another world. I was used to big skies, wild water,
snakes and horses, and solitude. What waited for me in
(d) this new world was tree-lined avenues, brick
buildings with white pillars, and a wood-paneled library.
(D)
Unlike back at home, in (e) the new school, I was no
longer the smartest kid in the classroom. I wasn’t the most
talented, or the least. Before going to Billups, one of my
dreams was to become a photographer. That dream came to
an abrupt halt in a photography class. There was no
denying in the other students’ pictures that they were far
more talented than I was. I became severely depressed as
one dream after another faded from me. Then, on the last
night of the summer program, it hit me. I had been blind
to a lesson that was staring at me in the face.
46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 의미하는 바가 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
48. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 북 캘리포니아에서 꾸준히 책을 읽으면서 자랐다.
② Billups에서 전에 생각했던 것보다 세상이 더 크다는 것을
깨달았다.
③ 대학 입학 후 사라져가는 꿈과 새로운 꿈에 관해 글을 쓰기
시작했다.
④ Billups가 제공하는 장학금을 받고 그곳의 여름 방학 프로그램에
참가했다.
⑤ 사진 수업에서 다른 학생들보다 자신의 재능이 더 뛰어나다고
생각했다.
[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The McDonald’s restaurants that are located across the
United States ― and, increasingly, the world ― have a
significance that goes far beyond the convenience of quick
hamburgers, milk shakes, and salads. As sociologist George
Ritzer says, our everyday lives are being ‘McDonaldized.’
The McDonaldization of society does not refer just to
the robotlike assembly of food. This term refers to the
standardization of everyday life, a process that is transforming
our lives. Want to do some shopping? Shopping malls offer
one-stop shopping in controlled environments. Planning a
trip? Travel agencies offer ‘package’ tours. They will
transport middle-class Americans to ten European capitals
in fourteen days. All visitors experience the same hotels,
restaurants, and other scheduled sites.
Efficiency brings dependability. You can expect your
burger and fries to taste the same whether you buy them
in Los Angeles or Beijing. Although efficiency also lowers
prices, it does come at a cost. Predictability washes away
spontaneity, changing the quality of our lives. It produces
a sameness, a bland version of what used to be unique
experiences. In my own travels, for example, had I taken
packaged tours I never would have had the eye-opening
experiences that have added so much to my appreciation of
human diversity. For good or bad, our lives are being
McDonaldized, and the predictability of packaged settings
seems to be our social destiny. Our coming prepackaged
society will be , of course. But it also means
that we will be trapped in the ‘iron cage’ of bureaucracy
― just as Weber warned would happen.
49. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Development of the Tourism Industry
② McDonaldization: A Societal Trend
③ Packaged Tours: Advantages and Disadvantages
④ Efficiency of Franchised Restaurants
⑤ How to Increase Predictability of Society
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① unique ② diverse ③ efficient
④ spontaneous ⑤ unpredictable

1
8
2012학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 가방을 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① bored ② curious ③ excited
④ jealous ⑤ worried
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 환자 간호 요령 ② 퇴원 시 유의 사항
③ 응급 상황 대처 방법 ④ 정기 건강 검진의 중요성
⑤ 병원 서비스 개선 계획
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to buy basketball tickets
② to analyze the test results
③ to check the gym schedule
④ to bring a referee for the game
⑤ to prepare snacks and beverages
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $ 36 ② $ 40 ③ $ 45 ④ $ 50 ⑤ $ 55
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 철저한 개인 위생 관리를 당부하려고
② 유행성 질병 예방 대책을 촉구하려고
③ 다양한 감정 표현 방법을 소개하려고
④ 즐거운 여가 활동의 중요성을 강조하려고
⑤ 웃음이 신체에 미치는 영향을 설명하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 가족 사진 찍어 주기 ② 과학 숙제 도와 주기
③ 수업 자료 복사해 주기 ④ 생일 선물 골라 주기
⑤ 도서관에 책 반납해 주기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
① 녹음실 ② 운동장 ③ 영화관
④ 주차장 ⑤ 진료실
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 신문 기자 - 소설가 ② 서점 직원 - 고객
③ 도서관 사서 - 학생 ④ 택배 기사 - 경비원
⑤ 여행사 직원 - 손님
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 연설문 검토하기 ② 연설문 출력하기
③ 포스터 게시하기 ④ 포스터 만들기
⑤ 보고서 작성하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 정수기
모델을 고르시오.
12. 다음을 듣고, Chicago Student Exchange Program에 관한
내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 참가 학생들은 6개월 동안 Chicago에 머무르게 된다.
② 수업 시간은 오전 9시부터 오후 4시까지이다.
③ 학교에서 교통편은 제공하지만, 점심은 제공하지 않는다.
④ 주말에 학생들은 다양한 야외 활동을 즐길 수 있다.
⑤ 학생 선발은 면접을 통해 이루어진다.
제 3 교시
홀수형
①
②
③
④
⑤
2 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
2
8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I hope you’ll understand money doesn’t matter.
② It doesn’t sound easy, but it must be rewarding.
③ More and more people enjoy hiking these days.
④ I’m glad I can work with you at the same company.
⑤ It’s a good idea to have a picnic at the nearby park.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① I agree with you. Practice makes perfect.
② You’re right. I’ll go see a doctor right away.
③ But it’s the only way you can keep playing the piano.
④ Congratulations! You won first place in the competition!
⑤ I’m delighted you’re fully recovered from your illness.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Don’t worry. It’s not your fault.
② Would you teach me how to read Chinese?
③ I’m very pleased to get this present from you.
④ I’ll go with you when I backpack to China next time.
⑤ Okay. I’ll try, but don’t blame me if I can’t figure it out.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jessica가 선생님에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Jessica:
① I think Tom needs some medical help.
② I’m sorry, but I have to go to the hospital.
③ May I go to the bathroom, please?
④ My condition couldn’t be better.
⑤ What’s going to be on the exam tomorrow?
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지
의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
In this digital age, images are essential units of
information, and knowing how to use photography
effectively is more important than ever. Fortunately,
enrolling at the Hobbiton Institute of Photography is one
of the easiest, most cost-effective ways to take your
photography to the next level. You’ll be assigned a
personal adviser, have your work evaluated by experienced
experts, and receive insightful suggestions on how to
make it better. You’ll also learn to think on your feet
and develop the eye of a photographer. You can pursue
your passion with us, and your photography will never
be the same.
① 사진 전문 강사진을 소개하려고
② 사진 전문 교육 기관을 홍보하려고
③ 디지털 사진 촬영 기법을 설명하려고
④ 사진 분야 취업 정보를 제공하려고
⑤ 디지털 사진술 활용을 권장하려고
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
One day in February 2009, Stephanie called Betty,
① her best friend, who was the only employee of her
business Best Wedding. Once again, they discussed the
company’s expenses and dwindling revenue. But this time,
Stephanie knew what she had to do. She gathered up her
courage and told ② her friend and colleague: “I have to
make this work. I have to let ③ you go.” Betty was hurt
but wasn’t particularly surprised. In a businesslike fashion,
the two women began figuring out how to disengage.
Betty said she wanted to start her own event-planning
business, and Stephanie agreed to let ④ her keep her
existing clients, some photography, and documents and
forms they had developed together. ⑤ She also gave Betty
two months’ salary as severance pay.
* severance: 해직
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
On January 10, 1992, a ship (A) traveled / traveling
through rough seas lost 12 cargo containers, one of
which held 28,800 floating bath toys. Brightly colored
ducks, frogs, and turtles were set adrift in the middle of
the Pacific Ocean. After seven months, the first toys
made landfall on beaches near Sitka, Alaska, 3,540
kilometers from (B) what / where they were lost. Other
toys floated north and west along the Alaskan coast and
across the Bering Sea. Some toy animals stayed at sea
(C) even / very longer. They floated completely along the
North Pacific currents, ending up back in Sitka.
(A) (B) (C)
① traveled …… what …… even
② traveled …… what …… very
③ traveling …… what …… even
④ traveling …… where …… even
⑤ traveling …… where …… very
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Researchers studied two mobile phone companies trying
to solve a technological problem. One company developed
what it called a ‘technology shelf,’ created by a small group
of engineers, on which ① was placed possible technical
solutions that other teams might use in the future. It also
created an open-ended conversation among ② its engineers
in which salespeople and designers were often included.
The boundaries among business units were deliberately
ambiguous because more than technical information was
needed ③ to get a feeling for the problem. However, the
other company proceeded with more seeming clarity and
discipline, ④ dividing the problem into its parts. Different
departments protected their territory. Individuals and teams,
competing with each other, stopped sharing information.
The two companies did eventually ⑤ solve the technological
problem, but the latter company had more difficulty than
the former.
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
During the 1997 Kyoto negotiations, Brazil made a
suggestion that has since become known as the Brazilian
Proposal. ① Its idea was that countries should now share
the burden of emissions cuts according to how historically
responsible they were for the problem. ② In other words,
we should calculate what concentration of greenhouse
gases each country has put into the atmosphere over time
and use those figures to allocate emissions cuts. ③ That
would mean, for instance, that countries such as Germany
and the United Kingdom, which have been emitting for
longer than most countries, would bear a larger share
than their current emissions implied. ④ Greenhouse gases
have been known to absorb heat and hold this heat in the
atmosphere, instead of reflecting it back into space. ⑤ It
would also mean that big emitters that had developed
their industries more recently, such as Australia, would
bear less of a share.
23. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
It started out like any other day. I had no idea that I
was in for one of the most terrifying experiences of my
life. I headed to the beach and jumped on my surfboard
and paddled out. I was about 150 yards off the beach,
when I felt a sudden chill in the air followed by an
uncomfortable stillness. Suddenly, I heard the lifeguard
scream, “Get out of the water!” There was a certain panic
in his voice that demanded attention. Then I saw something
approaching me in the water. It was big and gray, and
closing in on me fast. I tried to paddle back to shore but
my arms and legs were paralyzed.
① amused ② ashamed ③ disappointed
④ flattered ⑤ frightened
24. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many people use their cleverness to justify and excuse
themselves for the messiness of their workspaces. They
say things like, “I know where everything is.” Or they
say non-humorous things such as, “A clean desk is a
sign of a sick mind.” However, people who say they
know where everything is turn out to be using a large
amount of their mental capacity and creative energies
remembering where they placed things, rather than doing
the job. If they worked in a well-organized environment
for any length of time, they would be surprised at how
much more productive they were. If you have a tendency
to attempt to explain a messy desk or work area, challenge
yourself to work with a clean desk for an entire day.
The result will amaze you.
① 직원들의 사기 진작을 위해 유머 감각을 잃지 마라.
② 새로운 근무 환경에 빨리 적응하기 위해 노력하라.
③ 지적 능력을 향상시키기 위해 창의성을 개발하라.
④ 업무 편의를 위해 필요한 도구를 가까이 두어라.
⑤ 생산성을 높이기 위해 주변 환경을 정돈하라.
[25～30] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
25. What you do in the 15 to 30 minutes after eating your
evening meal sends powerful signals to your metabolism.
You’ll set the stage for more vigor throughout the evening
hours along with a weight-loss benefit if you stay
after your meal. Among many possible activities, walking
is one of the easiest ways to get some minutes of exercise
after a meal. In fact, research shows that if you walk
after a meal, you may burn 15 percent more calories than
if you walk the same time, distance, and intensity on an
empty stomach.
① active ② alone ③ full
④ satisfied ⑤ silent
26. Interestingly, people are more overconfident when they
feel like they have control of the outcome ― even when
this is clearly not the case. For example, it is documented
that if people are asked to bet on whether a coin toss is
heads or tails, most bet larger amounts if the coin is yet to
be tossed. If the coin is tossed and the outcome is concealed,
people will offer lower amounts when asked for bets. People
act as if __________________________________________.
In this case, control of the outcome is clearly an illusion.
This perception occurs in investing, as well. Even without
information, people believe the stocks they own will
perform better than stocks they do not own. However,
ownership of a stock only gives the illusion of having
control of the performance of the stock. [3점]
① the amount of the bet will influence the outcome
② their involvement will somehow affect the outcome of the toss
③ there is a parallel between a coin toss and stock investments
④ their illusion will not disappear even after the coin is tossed
⑤ they can predict the outcome with credible information
4 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
4
8
27. The truth is that everyone has a story. Every person
we meet has a story that can, in some way, inform us
and help us as we live the story of our own lives. When
we acknowledge this truth and begin to look at others as
________________________________, we open ourselves
up to new possibilities in our lives. In reality, the people
who are most different from us probably have the most
to teach us. The more we surround ourselves with people
who are the same as we are, who hold the same views,
and who share the same values, the greater the likelihood
that we will shrink as human beings rather than grow.
① rivals competing against us
② reliable guidelines for conformity
③ potential sources of valuable information
④ members of the same interest group
⑤ attentive listeners of our life stories
28. Although there are numerous explanations for the fall
of the Roman empire, the deeper cause lies in the declining
fertility of its soil and the decrease in agricultural yields.
Italy was densely forested at the beginning of Roman
rule. By the end of the Roman Imperium, however, Italy
had been stripped of forest cover. The timber was sold
on the open market and the soil converted to crops and
pastureland. The cleared soil was rich in minerals and
nutrients and provided substantial production yields.
Unfortunately, deforestation left the soil exposed to harsh
weather. Wind blew across the barren landscapes and
water ran down from the mountaintops and slopes, taking
the soil with them. Overgrazing of livestock resulted in
further deterioration of the soil. Consequently, Rome’s
___________________ could not provide sufficient energy
to maintain its infrastructure and the welfare of its
citizens.
① dense forests
② climate changes
③ irrigation system
④ declining population
⑤ agricultural production
29. The identical claim, expressed in two social contexts,
may have different qualifiers. When talking among
friends, you might say, “Lucé is the world’s finest
restaurant.” When speaking to a group of French chefs,
you might find yourself saying, “Lucé is an excellent
restaurant, comparable to some of the best in France.”
Why did you say it differently? Perhaps because you
expected a different critical scrutiny in the two groups.
Maybe because your was strong
enough for friends but not as strong among the most
knowledgeable. In each instance, you communicated the
extent to which you wanted to qualify your claim, to
guard yourself by restricting the extent to which you are
willing to be held accountable for the claim.
① desire to win friendship
② confidence in the claim
③ appetite for French cuisine
④ support for others’ opinions
⑤ suspicion of popular beliefs
30. Often in social scientific practice, even where evidence
is used, it is not used in the correct way for adequate
scientific testing. In much of social science, evidence is
used only to affirm a particular theory ― to search for
the positive instances that uphold it. But these are easy
to find and lead to the familiar dilemma in the social
sciences where we have two conflicting theories, each of
which can claim positive empirical evidence in its support
but which come to opposite conclusions. How should we
decide between them? Here the scientific use of evidence
may help. For what is distinctive about science is the
search for negative instances ― the search for ways to
falsify a theory, rather than to confirm it. The real power
of scientific testability is negative, not positive. Testing
allows us not merely to confirm our theories but to
. [3점]
① ignore the evidence against them
② falsify them by using positive empirical evidence
③ intensify the argument between conflicting theories
④ weed out those that do not fit the evidence
⑤ reject those that lack negative instances
31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The term euphemism derives from a Greek word meaning
‘to speak with good words’ and involves substituting a
more pleasant, less objectionable way of saying something
for a blunt or more direct way. Why do people use
euphemisms? They do so probably to help smooth out the
‘rough edges’ of life, to make the unbearable bearable
and the offensive inoffensive. (A) , euphemisms
can become dangerous when they are used to create
misperceptions of important issues. (B) , a politician
may indicate that one of his statements was ‘somewhat at
variance with the truth,’ meaning that he lied. Even more
serious examples include describing rotting slums as
‘substandard housing,’ making the miserable conditions
appear reasonable and the need for action less important.
(A) (B)
① However …… For example
② In short …… For example
③ That is …… Similarly
④ In addition …… Therefore
⑤ Nevertheless …… Similarly
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Until the 1920’s, there were only three competitive
swimming strokes ─ freestyle, backstroke, and breaststroke ─
and each had specific rules that described how it was to
be performed. The rules of breaststroke ① stated that
both arms must be pulled together underwater and then
recovered simultaneously back to the start of the pulling
position to begin the next stroke. Most people interpreted
this arm recovery to mean an ② underwater recovery. In
the 1920’s, however, someone ③ challenged the rules and
reinterpreted this arm recovery to be an out-of-the-water
recovery. Since this new breaststroke was about 15%
④ slower, people using the conventional version couldn’t
effectively compete. Something had to be done to solve
the problem. Finally, this new stroke ─ now known as
the ‘butterfly’ ─ won ⑤ recognition as the fourth swimming
stroke, and became an Olympic event in 1956.
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
33. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Even those of us who claim not to be materialistic
can’t help but form attachments to certain clothes. Like
fragments from old songs, clothes can (A) evoke / erase
both cherished and painful memories. A worn-thin dress
may hang in the back of a closet even though it hasn’t
been worn in years because the faint scent of pine that
lingers on it is all that remains of someone’s sixteenth
summer. A(n) (B) impractical / brand-new white scarf might
be pulled out of a donation bag at the last minute because
of the promise of elegance it once held for its owner.
And a ripped T-shirt might be (C) rescued / forgotten
from the dust rag bin long after the name of the rock
band once written across it has faded. Clothes document
personal history for us the same way that fossils chart
time for archaeologists.
(A) (B) (C)
① evoke …… impractical …… rescued
② evoke …… impractical …… forgotten
③ evoke …… brand-new …… forgotten
④ erase …… impractical …… rescued
⑤ erase …… brand-new …… forgotten
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. Living things naturally return to a state of balance.
When we are disturbed by forces acting on us, our inner
machinery kicks in and returns us to a balanced state of
equilibrium. Homeostasis is the word we use to describe
the ability of an organism to maintain internal equilibrium
by adjusting its physiological processes. Most of the
systems in animal and human physiology are controlled
by homeostasis. We don’t like to be off balance. We tend
to keep things in a stable condition. This system operates
at all levels. Our blood stays the same temperature.
Except for extraordinary exceptions, when people find
ways to intervene using methods more powerful than our
tendency to equilibrium, our habits, behaviors, thoughts,
and our quality of life stay pretty much the same too.
① physical balance needed for mental equilibrium
② inner mechanisms to enhance the quality of life
③ general tendency of organisms to keep equilibrium
④ major differences in animal and human physiology
⑤ biological processes resulting from habitual behaviors
35. All of us use the cultural knowledge we acquire as
members of our own society to organize our perception
and behavior. Most of us are also naive realists: we tend
to believe our culture mirrors a reality shared by
everyone. But cultures are different, and other people
rarely behave or interpret experience according to our
cultural plan. For example, an American anthropologist
attempted to tell the classic story of Hamlet to Tiv elders
in West Africa. She believed that human nature is pretty
much the same the whole world over; at least the general
plot and motivation of the great tragedy would always be
clear. But, at each turn in the story when she told it, the
Tiv interpreted the events and motives in Hamlet using
their own cultural knowledge. The result was a very
different version of the classic play.
① cultural differences in perception and interpretation
② tragic characteristics of classic West African plays
③ the positive function of culture as a mirror of reality
④ human nature and its role in developing culture
⑤ the process of acquiring cultural knowledge
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
The graphs above show the percentage of world
electricity generation by sources of energy for 1971 and
2007. ① According to the graphs, the primary source of
electricity generation in both 1971 and 2007 was coal
and peat, accounting for over 40% of the total electricity
generation. ② Oil showed the biggest decrease in electricity
generation, which fell from 20.9% in 1971 to 5.6% in
2007. ③ The source that showed the biggest increase was
nuclear, which rose from 2.1% in 1971 to 13.8% in
2007. ④ In 1971, hydro was the second biggest source of
electricity generation, but in 2007, gas was the second
biggest, accounting for more than 20% of the total
electricity generation. ⑤ Besides coal and peat, hydro was
the only source that accounted for more than 20% of the
total electricity generation in both 1971 and 2007.
37. 1920년대 Everest 등반에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는
것은?
Marking the Nepal-Tibet border, Everest looms as a
three-sided pyramid of gleaming ice and dark rock. The
first eight expeditions to Everest were British, all of which
attempted the mountain from the northern, Tibetan, side ―
not because it presented the most obvious weakness in the
peak’s formidable defenses but because in 1921 the
Tibetan government opened its borders to foreigners, while
Nepal remained off limits. The first Everesters were obliged
to trek 400 miles from Darjeeling across the Tibetan plateau
to reach the foot of the mountain. Their knowledge of the
deadly effects of extreme altitude was limited and their
equipment was poor. Yet in 1924, a member of the third
British expedition, Edward Felix Norton, reached an elevation
of 28,126 feet ― just 900 feet below the summit ― before
being defeated by exhaustion and snow blindness. It was an
astounding achievement that was not surpassed for 28 years.
① 처음 여덟 팀의 등반대는 Nepal 쪽에서 등반을 시작했다.
② 최초의 등반대는 Tibet 고원 지대를 우회하여 산기슭에 도달
했다.
③ 최초의 등반대는 극한 고도의 치명적 영향에 관한 지식이
충분했다.
④ 1924년에 Edward Felix Norton이 정상의 900피트 아래
지점까지 올랐다.
⑤ Edward Felix Norton의 등반 기록은 이듬해에 경신되었다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
6
8
38. Giorgio Vasari에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
Giorgio Vasari, the Italian painter, architect, and writer,
was born in Arezzo in 1511. He was considered to be more
successful as an architect than a painter. But what made
him truly famous was his book Lives of the Most Eminent
Painters, Sculptors and Architects (shortened as Lives). It is
not known exactly how many copies of the first edition of
Lives, published in 1550, were printed, but it earned Vasari
the praise of his peers. Then in a revised edition of Lives
in 1568, complete with portraits of the artists, he combined
biographical anecdotes with critical comment. Although the
revised edition overshadowed Vasari’s own achievements as
a painter and architect, it made him the most respected man
of the Italian art world. He was even knighted by Pope
Pius Ⅴ in 1571.
① Arezzo에서 태어난 이탈리아 화가, 건축가 겸 작가였다.
② Lives의 초판본으로 동료들로부터 칭송을 받았다.
③ Lives의 개정판에 예술가들의 전기적 일화와 비평을 함께 실었다.
④ Lives의 개정판으로 이탈리아 예술계에서 존경을 받지 못하게
되었다.
⑤ 1571년에 교황으로부터 기사 작위를 받았다.
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. The good news is that it’s never too late to start building
up muscle strength, regardless of your age. Ideally, though,
it’s best to start in your mid-forties when muscle mass
starts to decline significantly. “Once you’ve started, it can
take just six weeks to see an improvement of up to 20
percent in your muscle capabilities,” says Dr. Ward. Studies
have found that intense programs of strength training can
help even weak older people double their strength, as well
as enable them to walk faster and climb stairs more easily.
And muscle isn’t all you gain ― strength training can help
combat osteoarthritis, depression, and risk factors for heart
disease and diabetes.
* osteoarthritis: 골관절염
① 근력 운동의 효과는 단기간에 얻기 힘들다.
② 근력 운동에 필요한 기초 체력을 길러야 한다.
③ 40대 이후에는 성인병 예방에 주의를 기울여야 한다.
④ 운동량은 연령에 따라 적절히 조절해야 한다.
⑤ 근력 운동은 나이가 들어서도 건강에 유익하다.
40. Standard English allows access to certain educational
and economic opportunities, which is the primary reason
for teaching it. Students realize this when they interview
for a first job or when they plan for post-high school
education. So, what should teachers do when a student says,
“I ain’t got no pencil,” or brings some other nonstandard
dialect into the classroom? Opinions vary from ‘rejection
and correction’ to complete acceptance. The approach
most consistent with culturally responsive teaching is to
first accept the dialect and then build on it. For example,
when the student says, “I ain’t got no pencil,” the teacher
might say, “Oh, you don’t have a pencil. What should you
do, then?” Although results won’t be apparent immediately,
the long-range benefits ― both for language development
and attitudes toward school ― are worthwhile.
① 표준어 사용의 경제적 측면을 고려해야 한다.
② 비표준어 사용을 수용하면서 표준어를 교육해야 한다.
③ 단기 효과를 얻을 수 있는 교수 학습법을 개발해야 한다.
④ 면접에서 표준어를 사용하도록 취업 교육을 강화해야 한다.
⑤ 비문법적 표현이 고착되지 않도록 지체 없이 교정해야 한다.
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. Emotional eaters manifest their problem in lots of
different ways. For many people, one of the classic signs
of emotional eating is night eating. Night eaters are often
eating in response to anxiety or to the emotional turmoil
they’ve experienced throughout the day. Boredom and
loneliness are also more likely to come to the surface
when the rush of the day is done and the night stretches
ahead. Sometimes emotional eating is a reaction to a
specific situation. You had a bad day at work. The kids
have been so demanding that you are completely worn
out. You and your significant other are fighting. It
doesn’t matter what the circumstances are; the end result
is that 99 times out of 100 you end up on the couch
with a bowl of chips or bag of cookies in your hand,
telling yourself it’s the only way you can relax.
* turmoil: 혼란
① Family Life and Eating Behavior
② Emotional Eating: Signs and Reasons
③ Emotional Treatments for Night Eaters
④ Relaxation: An Ingredient for Good Diet
⑤ What You Eat Is What You Are!
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
42. Giving people the latitude and flexibility to use their
judgment and apply their talents rapidly accelerates
progress. Send a message of respect and inspire people to
be creative and use their individual talents toward the
goals of the enterprise. Empower people by letting them
know that you believe in them and allowing them to take
action. Trusting people and empowering them also allows
you to focus on the things you need to accomplish. Ellyn
McColgan says, “I used to say to people all the time, ‘I
can help you figure out just about any problem you
throw at me, but is that really what you want from me?’
They would look at me funny and say, ‘Not really.’ I
would say, ‘I think what you would like is to do a great
job and then give me an opportunity to say, ‘Great job!’’
Then they would respond, ‘Yes, that’s true.’”
① What Frustrates Employers Most?
② How to Hire a Competent Employee
③ Empowering Employees Through Trust
④ Talents: An Essential Factor in Life
⑤ Mixed Roles Between Employers and Employees
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Do you worry about losing your good health? Do you
fear that crime, war, or terrorist attacks will disrupt the
economy and your security?
(A) It’s because television focuses on news that makes the
world seem like a more dangerous place than it actually
is. Afraid of the world that is portrayed on TV, people
stay in their homes with close family and do not build
bonds with their neighbors.
(B) These are legitimate concerns that many people share.
We live in difficult and uncertain times. But are these
fears real? Research shows that people who watch a lot
of news on television overestimate the threats to their
well-being. Why?
(C) Thus they become more vulnerable. Surrounding ourselves
with a wall of fear, however, is not the answer. The
only way to overcome this problem is to be more
connected to others, and this connection will reduce fear
and isolation.
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절
한 곳은?
The DNA extracted from these bits of whale skin not
only identifies the individuals in the group, but also
reveals their relationships to each other.
Sperm whales travel in social groups that cooperate to
defend and protect each other, and may even share
suckling of calves. ( ① ) It is difficult to determine the
membership of these groups from sightings alone, because
of the practical difficulties of observing whale behavior,
most of which happens underwater. ( ② ) To make
things even more difficult, sperm whales can travel across
entire oceans and can dive to a depth of a kilometer.
( ③ ) Biologists who study whale behavior generally
have to be content with hanging around in boats, waiting
for their subjects to surface. ( ④ ) But when they do
surface, in addition to taking photos which allow
individual whales to be identified, biologists can zip over
in worryingly small boats and pick up the bits of skin
that the whales leave behind on the surface when they
re-submerge. ( ⑤ ) This has allowed researchers to
describe sperm whale social groups in detail.
* sperm whale: 향유고래
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Mediation is a process that has much in common with
advocacy but is also crucially different. It parallels
advocacy in so far as it tends to involve a process of
negotiation, but differs in so far as mediation involves
adopting a neutral role between two opposing parties
rather than taking up the case of one party against
another. At times, particularly in very complex
situations, the processes of advocacy and mediation can
overlap, perhaps with very problematic results, as one
loses clarity over his or her role. It is therefore
important, if not essential, to maintain a clear focus in
undertaking advocacy or mediation in order to ensure
that the roles do not become blurred and therefore
potentially counterproductive. For example, a mediator
who ‘takes sides’ is likely to lose all credibility, as is
an advocate who seeks to adopt a neutral position.
󰀻
Although both deal with negotiation, a mediator needs
to maintain (A) and an advocate partiality in
order to (B) crossing over into each other’s role.
(A) (B)
① neutrality …… avoid
② neutrality …… encourage
③ potentiality …… reinforce
④ creativity …… facilitate
⑤ creativity …… prevent
8 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
8
8
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
When I was a freshman in high school, I won second
prize in our local newspaper’s essay contest on the theme
of ‘future career.’ I wrote about wanting to become a
journalist. We had to collect our prizes at the local variety
store and, while waiting in line, a little notebook in the
stationery department caught my eye. (a) It was a black
and red hardcover book with the word ‘Record’ neatly
engraved in gold on the cover. I reasoned that since I
was going to be a journalist, I’d need a very special
notebook in which to write. So I bought (b) it.
(B)
Then during a serious illness when I was thirty-five, I
found the little notebook I had purchased twenty years
earlier. From my sick bed I noticed (c) it on a nearby
shelf. It was still blank but something told me to write
my deepest feelings and thoughts, my pain and fear, my
wishes and dreams, the words of my inner world. This
was my first ‘official’ journal. And the process of
journal-keeping through writing and drawing helped heal
me from a mysterious illness which had defied the
doctors and their medicines.
(C)
My life changed so much after that. I began listening
to my own feelings and inner wisdom. The insights I
gained through journal-keeping led me into a new career
as an art therapist and teacher of diary writing and drawing.
More importantly, I learned to play and enjoy life again.
For instance, several years after recovering from my
illness, I started skateboarding for the first time in my
life and loved (d) it. I’m grateful to that high school girl
that I was for having the sense to buy a little blank
book. I used it to save my life and to help others.
(D)
But I put the notebook away and promptly forgot about
(e) it and about becoming a journalist. Painting became
my great love. Upon graduating from high school, I went
to college as a fine art major and English minor. After
becoming a professional artist, marriage followed, then
the birth of two daughters. A career change came next
which led to teaching underprivileged young children in
Los Angeles. The years passed.
46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
48. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 지역 신문사의 에세이 대회에서 2등 상을 탔다.
② 심한 병을 앓고 있었을 때 20년 전에 산 공책을 발견했다.
③ 병이 나은 지 몇 년 후에 스케이트보딩을 처음으로 시작했다.
④ 대학에서 미술을 전공하지는 않았다.
⑤ 전문 화가가 된 후, 결혼을 했고 두 딸을 두었다.
[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Since the beginning of time, the mysterious nature of
dreaming has led people to believe that dreams were
messages from the other world. Dreams have been regarded
as prophetic communications which, when properly decoded,
would enable us to foretell the future. There is, however,
absolutely no scientific evidence for this theory. It is
certainly true that individuals who are concerned about a
traumatic event, such as the threat of the loss of a loved
one who is sick, will dream about that loved one more
than would otherwise be the case. If the dreamer then calls
and finds that the loved one has died, it is understandable
for him or her to assume that the dream was a premonition
of that death. But this is a mistake. It is simply a(n)
correspondence between a situation about
which one has intense concern and the occurrence of the
event that one fears.
To prove the existence of premonitory dreams, scientific
evidence must be obtained. We would need to do studies
in which individuals are sampled in terms of their dream
life and judges are asked to make correspondences between
these dream events and events that occurred in real life. A
problem that arises here is that individuals who believe in
premonitory dreams may give one or two striking examples
of ‘hits,’ but they never tell you how many of their
premonitory dreams ‘missed.’ To do a scientific study of
dream prophecy, we would need to establish some base of
how commonly correspondences occur between
dream and waking reality. Until we have that evidence,
it is better to believe that the assumption is false.
* premonitory: 예고의, 전조의
49. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Why Do People Dream?
② Ways to Interpret Dreams
③ Origin of Dream Prophecy
④ Scientific History of Dreams
⑤ Can Dreams Foretell the Future?
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 공통으로 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① close ② coincidental ③ inevitable
④ logical ⑤ scientific

1 8
◦ 문제지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 쓰시오.
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 쓰고, 또 수험 번호와
답을 정확히 표시하시오.
◦ 문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을
참고하시오. 1점과 3점 문항에만 점수가 표시되어 있습니다.
점수 표시가 없는 문항은 모두 2점입니다.
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 찍을 사진의 대상을 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정 변화로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① upset → relieved ② curious → disappointed
③ delighted → worried ④ indifferent → thankful
⑤ excited → stressed
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르
시오. 실험실 수업의 장단점 ①
② 교내 안전사고 방지 방안
③ 실험실 화재 발생 시 대피 요령
④ 실험실 수업 시 올바른 용의복장
⑤ 학생 용의복장 규정 개정의 필요성
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to repair the printer
② to print out a coupon
③ to sign up for the website
④ to make a call to the office
⑤ to visit the Customer Service
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $160 ② $ 170 ③ $180 ④ $190 ⑤ $200
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고
르시오.
① 놀이동산 개장 시간 변경을 안내하려고
② 놀이동산 안내 책자를 소개하려고
③ 놀이기구 이용 수칙을 설명하려고
④ 놀이기구 운행 중지를 알리려고
⑤ 새로운 놀이기구를 홍보하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 명찰 만들기 ② 명찰 나누어 주기
③ 프로젝트 도와주기 ④ 워크숍에 데려다 주기
⑤ 워크숍에 대신 참석하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳
을 고르시오.
① 민속촌 ② 버스 안 ③ 지하철역
④ 결혼식장 ⑤ 엘리베이터 앞
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 가게 주인-점원 ② 부동산 중개인-집주인
③ 출판업자-소설가 ④ 경비원-아파트 입주민
⑤ 집배원-우편물 수령인
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 점원 추천하기 ② 일자리 소개하기
③ 할인 판매 홍보하기 ④ 재고 목록 작성하기
⑤ 상품 포장하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 예약할 방갈로를 고르
시오.
Bungalows at Meadow Campsite
Person Bedroom Price Feature
① up to 5 2 $65 Fireplace
② up to 5 2 $70 Lake view
③ up to 8 2 $70 Additional bathroom
④ up to 8 3 $100 Lake view
⑤ up to 8 3 $100 Additional bathroom
12. 다음을 듣고, Felucca Tour에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것
을 고르시오. [3점]
① 오전 9시에 시작한다.
② 전체 소요 시간은 3시간이다.
③ 도중에 섬에 내려 관광을 한다.
④ 섬에서 점심 식사를 한다.
⑤ 인원에 따라 일인당 요금이 다르다.
2012학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
제 3 교시 외국어(영어) 영역
성명 수험 번호 3 1
외국어(영어) 영역 2
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
2 8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① I believe you’ll look great at the audition.
② That’s a good idea. I’ll buy new contact lenses.
③ I’m afraid your eye infection won’t go away easily.
④ Okay. I’m going to wear my glasses from now on.
⑤ I don’t want to. I can’t see well without my glasses.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Calm down. We don’t have to hurry.
② They’re fine. You don’t need to return them.
③ It’s a formal party. You should dress up in a suit.
④ That’s because everyone loves to wear jeans.
⑤ I don’t want to buy jeans and a sweater.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① You got me wrong. I love to get free stuff.
② I’ll give it to you. It’s still in good condition.
③ No, I don’t. I prefer to buy brand-new products.
④ You’re right. I don’t usually throw away my stuff.
⑤ Exactly. You shouldn’t throw things away on the street.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Alice가 경비원에게 할 말로 가장 적
절한 것을 고르시오.
Alice:
① Wow, time flies! Let’s go home now.
② The building is locked. Can you open it?
③ Sorry, but is it okay if I leave around eleven?
④ Thanks for letting me know. I’ll be there soon.
⑤ The presentation will be delayed for thirty minutes.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제는 다 끝났습니다. 18번부터는
문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
You can learn the success secrets of the greatest people
who ever lived. The lives of famous people have been
recorded in biographies and are ready for you to read and
research. The lives of great government leaders,
businesspeople, and humanitarians are there. You will read
about successes and triumphs. You will also learn how many
times champions lose on their way to winning. In reading
biographies, you may come to the startling conclusion that
you are not very different from those great people. You may
conclude, “Hey, I can do that.” You can make your life
significant. Biographies help show the way. You only have to
go to the library, bookstores, or surf the Internet.
① 위인전 읽기를 장려하려고
② 자기 계발 프로그램을 홍보하려고
③ 도서 구입 예산 증대를 요청하려고
④ 효율적인 자료 수집 방법을 소개하려고
⑤ 자서전 출판을 위한 정보를 제공하려고
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? [1점]
Nineteenth-century inventors often found themselves
cheated and spent much of their lives fighting costly
court battles. Consider the fate of poor Elias Howe. In
1846, ①this young Boston native produced the first
workable sewing machine. The trouble was that no one
wanted it. Depressed by his failure, Howe traveled to
England, where ② he hoped that the invention might be
given a warmer reception. It was not. After two terrible
years, ③ the frustrated inventor had to work his passage
home on a merchant ship. Arriving penniless in Boston, he
discovered that in his absence a man called Isaac Singer
had stolen ④his patent and set up a sewing machine
factory. Howe took Singer to court, where two things
became clear: Singer was a thief, but ⑤he was so rich that
he could afford to hire the sharpest lawyers. It was only
after a lengthy fight that Howe could get royalties from
Singer.
20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
We do not hear with our eyes, but sometimes it almost
seems as if we do. An environment-agency official tells a
surprising incident about some people ①who lived in an
apartment building close to a busy state highway. The
families were made ②miserably by the noise, and they
complained to the city government. City officials went to the
state capital again and again to ask that something ③be
done about quieting the highway noise. They were put off
repeatedly. At last the city officials had an idea. They
planted a single row of trees in front of the apartment
house. The trees made hardly any difference in the amount
of noise, but they ④did block the view of the highway.
After that, there were very ⑤few complaints from the
people in the building.
외국어(영어) 영역 3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
3 8
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
The observation that old windows are often thicker at the
bottom than at the top (A)is/ are often offered as supporting
evidence for the view that glass flows over a time scale of
centuries. However, this assumption is incorrect; once
solidified, glass does not flow anymore. The reason for the
observation is (B) that / what in the past, making uniformly
flat glass was almost impossible. The technique used to make
panes of glass was to spin molten glass so as to create a
round, mostly flat plate. This plate was then cut to fit a
window. However, the edges of the disk became thicker as
the glass spun. When (C)installing/ installed in a window
frame, the glass would be placed thicker side down for the
sake of stability. *molten: 녹은, 용해된
(A) (B) (C) (A) (B) (C)
① is that installing ② is what installed
③ is that installed ④ are what installing
⑤ are what installed
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Rice paddies are “built,” not “opened up” the way a wheat
field is. You don’t just clear the trees, underbrush, and
stones, and then plow. ①Rice paddies are carved into
mountainsides in an elaborate series of terraces, or
painstakingly constructed from marshland and river plains.
②The crops turn a magical green, and by the time of the
first harvest, the land becomes an unending sea of yellow.
③They have to be irrigated, so a complex system of
channels must be dug from the nearest water source. ④The
paddy itself, meanwhile, has to have a hard clay floor;
otherwise the water will simply seep into the ground. ⑤And
the paddy has to be carefully engineered so that it will drain
properly and also keep the plants submerged at the optimum
level. *rice paddy: 논
23. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
After five hours of rock climbing, we six finally stood on
top, shaking hands. It was a big moment. As I grasped the
hands of my companions, one by one, I felt I was being
welcomed into a special club: the brotherhood of the rope.
Having missed breakfast we turned eagerly to lunch, breaking
out peanut butter sandwiches, apples, and cookies. As we sat
on the summit, gobbling the food, we surveyed our domain
like kings—the lakes, the rolling granite, the meadows and
forests, all spread out beneath us. Beautiful spires rose on
all sides. This was the wonderland of the High Sierra and we
were in the heart of it. We weren’t just visitors or mere
sightseers. We had struggled and climbed a mountain. We had
earned the right to be part of all this. * spire: 뾰족한 봉우리
① pleased and proud ② eager and envious
③ scared and desperate ④ curious and grateful
⑤ surprised and confused
24. 자녀의 행동 교정에 관해 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
There are all kinds of reasons that people fail themselves
and their children when trying to correct inappropriate behavior.
One of them is both serious and obvious to people outside the
“parental unit.” It occurs when one parent interferes with the
other during the correction process. It is hardly ever done
consciously and it almost always happens because of predictable,
inherent differences between partners. And it is essential to
stop. Couples who do not present a united front to their
children not only risk confusing their children, but they also
risk damaging their husband-wife relationships. One parent
becomes the good guy, and the other becomes the bad guy to
the kids. If Dad says “no candy” at the grocery store and Mom
gives in all the time, look out. They’re in for trouble.
① 부부가 동일한 태도를 취해야 한다.
② 전문 기관에 조언을 구해야 한다.
③ 보상을 적절하게 활용해야 한다.
④ 장기적인 계획을 세워야 한다.
⑤ 엄격한 규칙을 정해야 한다.
[25~30] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
25. Psychologists have spent years trying to discover the answer
to the question, “What makes innovators different?” In one of
the most thorough examinations of the subject, Harvard
researchers spent six years and interviewed three thousand
executives to find out. Their conclusions are interesting, but the
investigators could have saved themselves a lot of time by
simply asking Steve Jobs. According to the Harvard research,
the number one skill that separates innovators from noncreative
professionals is “associating”: the ability to successfully connect
seemingly unrelated questions, problems, or ideas from different
fields. “The more diverse our experience and knowledge, the
more connections the brain can make. Fresh inputs trigger new
associations; for some, these lead to .”
① novel ideas ② scientific proofs
③ moral lessons ④ cultural diversity
⑤ mistaken conclusions
26. When you watch a chase scene in an action movie, your
heart races as well —you may be a little bit scared, or
excited. Your body and mind may react like the experience
is real, as though it is happening to you. That’s what
happens when you visualize: You ask for the experience and
your mind believes that it is real, which creates the
attraction for you to receive in your life. This technique is
favored by many of the world’s great coaches as they
encourage athletes to visualize the actual race or contest
ahead of time. Every stroke, step, and muscle exertion is
vividly imagined. The idea is, when you see it in your mind,
your body will surely follow. And, when the big day comes,
mind and body are so well trained to act in unison that
is virtually assured.
① fierce competition ② group cooperation
③ ultimate performance ④ public reputation
⑤ visual observation
외국어(영어) 영역 4
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
4 8
27. The other day, while riding in an airplane flying at 30,000
feet, I had a sudden realization. I knew nothing about the
pilot, beyond the sound of his voice. I couldn’t even
remember his name because I had not been paying close
attention when he made his welcoming announcement. Yet I
was there, feeling comfortable and safe. I realized that I
was lacking a lot of other important information about the
situation I was in. Who were the mechanics that checked the
plane before it took off? Who had put in the fuel? Who had
performed the routine maintenance? Who were the air traffic
controllers that were watching the little spot on their
tracking screens, the little spot that contained my life and
the lives of my fellow passengers? The awareness of
really came home to me.
① what impact air travel could have on us
② how many people overcame the fear of flying
③ how much trust we put in complete strangers
④ what great new ideas we got from traveling
⑤ how fast technology changed our lives
28. Our sense of smell is particularly vulnerable to outside
influence. A team of scientists at Oxford has shown that a
simple word label can profoundly alter what we think our
noses are telling us. When an experimental subject is given
odorless air to smell but told he is smelling cheddar cheese,
his olfactory areas light up in hungry anticipation. But when
the same air arrives with a “body-odor” label, the subject
unwittingly shuts down the smell areas of his brain.
Although the sensation hasn’t changed— it’s still just purified
air —the mind has completely revised its olfactory response.
We unknowingly deceive ourselves. In reality, our olfactory
sensations . * olfactory: 후각의
① control our overall mood
② bring about old memories
③ keep us from enjoying food
④ are influenced by their context
⑤ compensate for the loss of sight
29. During World War II, a physician named Henry Beecher
was stationed on Italy’s Anzio beachhead, where he treated
201 wounded soldiers. In recording his treatments, he
observed that only three-quarters of the wounded soldiers
requested pain medication, although they had suffered serious
injuries ranging from penetrating wounds to extensive surgical
wounds. Beecher compared these observations to treatments
of his civilian patients who had been hurt in all kinds of
accidents, and he found that people with civilian injuries
requested more medication than the soldiers injured in battle
did. Beecher concluded that there was no direct relationship
between the severity of the wound and the intensity of pain.
He was among the first to propose that greatly
determines the level of pain. For soldiers, the wound meant
surviving combat and returning home.
* beachhead: (군사) 해안 교두보
① the kind of drug used for treatment
② the previous experience of severe pain
③ the meaning our minds give to an injury
④ the way caregivers interact with patients
⑤ the quality of medical information given to patients
30. A few years ago, the animal researcher Maxine Morris
spotted some curious behavior while observing a group of
Asian elephants at Washington Park Zoo in Indiana. At
feeding time, each elephant was given a big bundle of hay.
Morris noticed that a couple of the elephants tended to eat
their own hay quickly, approach their slower-eating
companions, and then start swinging their trunks from side
to side in a seemingly aimless way. To the uninformed, it
appeared that these elephants were just passing the time of
day. However, Morris’s repeated observations suggested that
. Once the trunk-swinging elephants
were sufficiently close to another elephant, they would
suddenly grab some of the uneaten hay and quickly gobble it
up. Elephants are notoriously nearsighted, and so the
slow-eating elephants were often completely unaware of the
theft. [3점]
① this behavior often turned into a fierce fight for mates
② their friendly nature was hidden behind this behavior
③ the trunk-swinging ensured their dominant position
④ their trunks were used to warn outside danger
⑤ this behavior masked a dishonest intent
31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
There are situations in which the differences between
experts and the public reflect a genuine conflict of values.
(A) , experts often measure risks by the number of
lives lost, while the public tends to draw finer distinctions
between “good deaths” and “bad deaths,” or between random
accidental fatalities and deaths that occur in the course of
voluntary activities such as skiing. These legitimate
distinctions are often ignored in statistics that merely count
cases. The public may have a richer conception of risks than
the experts do. (B) , the view cannot be maintained
that experts’ opinions should be accepted without question
when they conflict with the opinions of other citizens. When
experts and the public disagree on their priorities, each side
must respect the insights and intelligence of the other.
(A) (B)
① For example ···· Consequently
② For example ···· In contrast
③ For example ···· In addition
④ However ···· In addition
⑤ However ···· Consequently
외국어(영어) 영역 5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
5 8
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Girls usually agreed that wearing a uniform to school
every day ①reduced their daily stresses. Not having to
worry about what to wear meant one less decision to
make every morning. Many of them also felt that the
uniform ② enhanced school spirit and solidarity. They could
feel like they belong to a community. Moreover, the
uniforms ③eliminated their individuality. If you want to
know a thousand and one ways to ④modify a school
uniform, just ask the girls who wear it: ties can be worn
loosely or tight, and skirts can be raised or lowered in any
of a half-dozen ways. Then there are accessories— a gray
region in the dress code, but an entire subcontinent in the
world of women’s apparel. There are a million ⑤options in
the domain of hairpins, watches, and bags alone.
33. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Even an electronic car key can (A) cause/ fight crime.
After a thief broke into a car, the owner, alerted to the
break-in by a neighbor, grabbed her car keys and hurried
outside. When the burglar saw the owner approaching, he
tried to exit the car. But the owner was too fast. She
pressed the automatic “lock” button on the car’s remote key
system, (B) releasing / trapping the burglar. When the bad
guy unlocked the door, the owner locked it again before he
could escape. Over and over the burglar tried to unlock the
door, and over and over the owner relocked it. The burglar
finally put up his hands in (C) surrender / resistance and
waited for the police to arrive.
(A) (B) (C)
① cause ···· releasing ···· resistance
② cause ···· releasing ···· surrender
③ fight ···· trapping ···· surrender
④ fight ···· releasing ···· surrender
⑤ fight ···· trapping ···· resistance
[34~35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. The chef always wears a uniform in the kitchen. The
uniform protects the chef from the food, and it also protects
the food from the chef. In the first case, the long sleeves,
long pants, and double-breasted jacket are a barrier against
burns, spills, and splatters. Sturdy shoes guard against
falling equipment and knives, and they also prevent the chef
from slipping on floors made slippery by spilled food and
grease. In the second case, the long sleeves, double-breasted
jacket, and neckerchief protect the food from a sweating chef.
The tall white chef’s hat keeps the chef’s hair out of his
eyes and out of the food, and also, like the stars on a
general’s hat or the distinctive hat of an admiral, makes it
easy to see who is in charge in a crowded kitchen.
① hidden dangers in the kitchen
② the functions of the chef’s uniform
③ the value of a well-organized kitchen
④ the process of inventing a new dish
⑤ the do’s and don’ts in the kitchen
35. Try an interesting experiment. Call a friend and say, “I’m
mad at you” in a tone that conveys that you aren’t ―the
tone you would use if the next sentence were something
like, “You didn’t tell me about your promotion.” Then ask
your friend if she thought you were truly angry. The answer
will probably be no. Now imagine what would have happened
if you had sent that friend an email that read, “I’m mad at
you.” Our voice is a very subtle instrument and can convey
every shade and nuance. An executive recruiter said she
never uses email to check references. When she’s on the
phone, a pause or a strained voice in response to a question
about work habits can hint at a more complicated answer
than the one she’s been given.
① why expressing negative feelings is important
② voice as a subtle instrument in communication
③ the relationship between voice and personality
④ how to be successful in a job interview
⑤ how to interpret others’ emotions
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
This graph shows how much waste was produced from
2006 to 2010 by our company. ① The total amount of
waste produced each year was over 10,000 tons between
2006 and 2008, but it fell to below 10,000 tons starting
from 2009. ② The rate of recycling waste increased during
the five-year period, reaching ninety-seven percent in
2010. ③Meanwhile, the amount of recycled waste reached
its peak in 2008. ④On the other hand, the waste that was
disposed of in landfills decreased in amount during the years
from 2006 to 2010. ⑤Especially in 2008, the landfill amount
sharply decreased to less than half that of the previous year.
외국어(영어) 영역 6
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
6 8
37. ‘The object’에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
In 1898, a peculiar six-inch wooden object was found in a
tomb in Egypt. ‘The object’ had a body, seven-inch wings
that curved downward slightly, a fixed rudder, and a tail. It
looked very much like a modern airplane. But as airplanes
had not yet been invented in 1898, it was labeled as a
model of a bird and just stored away in the basement of the
Cairo Museum. In 1969, the object was rediscovered by Dr.
Khalil Messiha, an authority on ancient models. According to
him and to other researchers, it has characteristics of very
advanced aerodynamics. The curved wings can attain great
amounts of lift, and a similar design is employed on the
Concorde aircraft. Was this just a child’s toy? Or was it a
scale model of an aircraft the Egyptians planned to build...
or built? Even if they did build a full-scale version of the
aircraft, no evidence exists of it.
* rudder: (비행기 등의)방향타
① 1898년에 Khalil Messiha 박사가 발굴하였다.
② 발굴 당시에는 비행기의 모형으로 생각되었다.
③ 카이로 박물관으로부터 보관을 거절당했다.
④ 날개의 모양이 콩코드 비행기와 비슷하다.
⑤ 아동용 장난감이었다는 증거가 있다.
38. Lake Vostok에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Miles underneath the ice in Antarctica lie liquid lakes. The
largest of these is Lake Vostok, which is similar in size to
Lake Ontario in Canada, but four times as deep. Lake Vostok
was formed along geologic fault lines. It stays liquid because
of the pressure of the glaciers above it and the heat from
the geologic fault beneath. Lake Vostok is thought to have
been sealed off from Earth’s atmosphere for half a million
years. Samples of ice from near the surface of Lake Vostok,
located under a glacier more than 3.2 km thick, contain
microbes thought to have come from inside the lake.
Scientists are working to create technology that will allow
them to remove water samples from the lake and examine
them for ancient life in a way that does not introduce
contamination from the modern world.
*fault: (지질) 단층
① 남극 대륙의 빙하 아래에 존재하는 호수이다.
② 단층선이 지나는 곳을 따라 형성되어 있다.
③ 지상의 공기로부터 50만년 동안 차단된 것으로 여겨진다.
④ 수면 근처의 얼음 샘플에서 미생물이 발견되지 않았다.
⑤ 오염을 유발하지 않는 물 샘플 채취 기술이 개발되고 있다.
[39~40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. As a counselor, I often use the North Star as a metaphor.
I tell clients: You are in a boat that is being tossed around
by the winds of the world. The voices of your parents, your
teachers, your friends, and the media can blow you east,
then west, then back again. To stay on course you must
follow your own North Star, your sense of who you truly
are. Only by orienting north can you keep from being blown
all over the sea. True freedom has more to do with
following the North Star than with going whichever way the
wind blows. Sometimes it seems like freedom is blowing
with the winds of the day, but that kind of freedom is really
an illusion. It turns your boat in circles. Freedom is sailing
toward your dreams.
① 다양한 의견을 듣고 진로를 정해야 한다.
② 꿈을 이룰 자유는 누구에게나 보장되어야 한다.
③ 적절한 순간에 도움을 주는 청소년 상담이 필요하다.
④ 학교와 가정은 청소년을 보호하는 역할에 충실해야 한다.
⑤ 외부의 영향에 휘둘리지 말고 뚜렷한 주관을 가져야 한다.
40. “It’s great, it’s amazing, it’s so cool....” Can you tell from
these whether it’s your coworker telling you about her new
car, or your teenager son describing the new telephone he
wants you to get him? I’m sure you can’t. We’ll believe your
experience is amazing only if you tell us why. We need to
know ―what did you see? Hear? Touch? Taste? Smell? How
did it make you feel? What did it remind you of? Notice
when others are just saying, “great,” “amazing,” “bad,”
“terrible.” Once you’ve spent some time observing others,
you will want to change your own bad habits of using these
meaningless words. Now, let’s practice: How was your day?
Your sandwiches? The movie? Instead of blurting out, “It
was great,” try to answer these questions as vividly as
possible. Once you learn to do that, people will start
referring to you as a master storyteller.
① 상대방의 관심사에 따라 화제를 전환하라.
② 자신의 기준만으로 다른 사람을 판단하지 말라.
③ 자신의 경험을 잘 전달하려면 구체적으로 묘사하라.
④ 긍정적인 반응을 통해 상대방이 말하도록 격려하라.
⑤ 신뢰감을 얻으려면 어려운 어휘의 사용을 자제하라.
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. In 2007, the Ecuadorean government announced that it
intended to protect the oilfields located in the Yasuni
Rainforest. It’s home to one of the world’s largest undeveloped
oil reserves—close to one billion barrels’ worth. Not extracting
that oil will prevent the release of an estimated 400 million
tons of carbon into the atmosphere. Taking a stand for the
Yasuni oilfield’s protection is a bold move, considering that
about seventy percent of Ecuador’s income is from oil. To
accomplish the plan, they asked the international community to pay
them half of the income that would result from the extraction, or
$350 million a year for a decade. This is a big deal: an
innovative idea that other developing countries could employ to
protect their own resources and help combat climate change.
외국어(영어) 영역 7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
7 8
① Keep the Oil Underground for the Earth
② Uncover the Hidden Costs of Cheap Oil
③ Secure International Aid for the Poor
④ Don’t Raise the Oil Prices
⑤ Find New Energy Sources
42. Some people work long hours even at very high levels of
income. Have they got their priorities right? Most people
would agree that, at a low level of income, an increase in
income is likely to improve your quality of life, even if it
means longer working hours. At this level, even if you have
to work longer in your factory, higher income is likely to
bring a higher overall quality of life by improving your
health through better food, heating, hygiene and healthcare
and by reducing the physical demands of household work
through more household appliances. However, above a certain
level of income, the relative value of material consumption
in relation to leisure time is diminished, so earning a higher
income at the cost of working longer hours may reduce the
quality of your life.
① Does Working More Always Pay?
② Happier People Work Harder
③ Equal Pay for Equal Work
Consume Less, Save More ④
⑤ How Does Income Affect Health?
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
My family moved to a two-story house. One day, my
husband and I discovered that when our kids were in a
certain section of the basement, the sounds of their
playing floated up through the heating vent into our room.
(A) I was shocked. It hadn’t occurred to me that they could
overhear us just as well as we could overhear them,
though this was obvious as soon as they mentioned it.
(B) As I was reading on the couch near that vent, I was
astonished by how clearly I could hear every word they
were saying. For a few minutes, I listened intently. But
then I felt sneaky.
(C) So when they scrambled up the stairs, demanding lunch,
I told them the secret. I thought they’d be surprised, but
they weren’t. They just shrugged their shoulders. “We
know,” they said. “We hear you and Daddy talking, too.”
① (A) ‑ (C)‑ (B) ② (B) ‑ (A) ‑ (C)
③ (B) ‑ (C) ‑ (A) ④ (C) ‑ (A) ‑ (B)
⑤ (C) ‑ (B) ‑ (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
When the runners arrived they grabbed the figures — the
first taking the most noble birds, the last getting the
worthless reptile.
To become a member of the Inca upper class it was
necessary to have a four-year education in which a running
race was the most important test. ( ① ) On the first day of
the running examination, the candidates gathered in the great
square in Cuzco. ( ② ) Together with their families the
whole group went to Mt. Huanacauri, in order to live on a
strict diet of water and raw corn and to perform rituals and
dances. ( ③ ) A few days later, the candidates competed in
a five-mile race to the holy hill of Huanacauri. ( ④ )
Before the day of the race the organizers placed animal
figures carved in stone-salt on the summit, which was the
finishing line; the figures depicted the falcon, the eagle, the
wild duck, the humming bird, the fox, the snake, and so on.
( ⑤ ) Thus each man carried the proof of his own strength
or weakness and the spectators knew who to praise and who
to mock.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
In one study, people were put one at a time in a
pressure chamber and told that the pressure would slowly
be increased to that of a sixty-foot dive. While inside
the pressure chamber, the subject was asked to perform
two simple visual tasks. One task was to respond to
blinking lights in the center of the subject’s visual field,
and the other involved responding to blinking lights in his
peripheral, or side vision. As expected, each of the
subjects inside the pressure chamber showed all the usual
signs of panic — racing pulse and elevated blood pressure.
These symptoms affected performance in a very distinct
way. Although the people in the pressure chamber
performed just as well as control subjects in an ordinary
room did on the central visual task, those in the pressure
room were twice as likely to miss the lights in their
peripheral vision.
This experiment showed that when the level of (A)
got high, the range of vision became (B) .
(A) (B)
① anxiety ···· wider
② anxiety ···· narrower
③ curiosity ···· wider
④ curiosity ···· narrower
⑤ proficiency ···· narrower
외국어(영어) 영역 8
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
8 8
[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
On the first day of shooting for The 39 Steps in 1935,
Hitchcock’s two leads, Madeleine Carroll and Robert Donat,
arrived on the set feeling a little tense. That day (a)they
were to act in one of the movie’s more complex scenes:
playing relative strangers who had gotten handcuffed
together earlier in the plot and, still handcuffed, were forced
to run through the Scottish countryside to escape the film’s
villains. Hitchcock had given them no real sign of how he
wanted (b)them to act the scene. Carroll in particular was
bothered by the director’s behavior.
(B)
This English actress, one of the most elegant film
stars of the period, had spent much of her career in
Hollywood, where directors had treated her like royalty;
Hitchcock, on the other hand, was distant, hard to figure
out. She had decided to play the scene with an air of
dignity, the way she thought a lady would respond to the
situation of being handcuffed to a strange man. When
Hitchcock arrived on the set, he explained the scene to
the two actors, snapped a pair of handcuffs on them, and
proceeded to lead (c) them through the set.
(C)
Hitchcock returned in the afternoon— he had found the
key. Shooting began, but as the actors went to work, it
was hard for (d) them to get over the experience of that
day. Carroll had forgotten all her ideas about how to play
the scene. And yet, despite her and Donat’s anger, the
scene seemed to flow with unexpected naturalness. Now
they knew what it was like to be tied together; they had
felt the awkwardness, so there was no need to act it. It
came from within.
(D)
Then, in the middle of this demonstration, he was
suddenly called away to attend to a technical matter. He
would return soon; they should take a break. He felt in
his pockets for the key to the handcuffs — but no, he
must have mislaid it, and off he hurried, seemingly to
find the key. Hours went by. Donat and Carroll became
increasingly frustrated and embarrassed. While the crew
members were free to go about (e) their business, the
two stars were tied together. They could not even go to
the bathroom. It was humiliating.
46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
① (B) ‑ (D) ‑ (C) ② (C) ‑ (B) ‑ (D) ③ (C) ‑ (D) ‑ (B)
④ (D) ‑ (B) ‑ (C) ⑤ (D) ‑ (C) ‑ (B)
47. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
48. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Movie: A Fountain of Inspiration
② Making a Movie Without a Director
③ Bitter Rivalry Between Movie Stars
④ Natural Acting Through Real Experience
⑤ Self-Confidence: An Essential Quality for Actors
[49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
A few years ago I met a man named Phil at a
parent-teachers’ organization meeting at my daughter’s
school. As soon as I met him, I remembered something
that my wife had told me about Phil: “He’s a real pain at
meetings.” I quickly saw what she meant. When the
principal was explaining a new reading program, Phil
interrupted and asked how his son would benefit from it.
Later in the meeting, Phil argued with another parent,
unwilling to consider her point of view.
When I got home, I said to my wife, “You were right
about Phil. He’s rude and arrogant.” My wife looked at me
quizzically. “Phil isn’t the one I was telling you about,” she
said. “That was Bill. Phil is actually a very nice guy.”
Sheepishly, I thought back to the meeting and realized that
Phil had probably not interrupted or argued with people
any more than others had. Further, I realized that even
Phil’s interruption of the principal was not so clear-cut.
My interpretation was just that — an unconscious
interpretation of a behavior that was open to many
interpretations.
It is well known that first impressions are powerful,
even when they are based on . What may
not be so obvious is the extent to which the adaptive
unconscious is doing the interpreting. When I saw Phil
interrupt the principal I felt as though I was observing an
objectively rude act. I had no idea that Phil’s behavior
was being interpreted by my adaptive unconscious and
then presented to me as reality. Thus, even though I was
aware of my expectations, I had no idea how much this
expectation colored my interpretation of his behavior.
*adaptive unconscious: 적응 무의식
49. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① personal preference ② selfish motivation
③ exaggerated phrase ④ faulty information
⑤ cultural prejudice
50. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 필자는 자녀의 학교에서 열린 모임에 참석했다.
② 교장은 새로운 독서 프로그램에 대해 설명했다.
③ Phil은 교장의 발표 도중에 질문을 했다.
④ 필자의 아내는 Phil에 대해 부정적으로 이야기했다.
⑤ 필자는 Phil의 행동에 대한 판단을 정정했다.
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.

1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
①
②
③
④
⑤
2013학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 주문한 트로피를 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① joyful ② lonely ③ worried
④ determined ⑤ sympathetic
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 여행 일지 작성의 필요성
② 여행할 때 지켜야 할 안전수칙
③ 구체적 여행 일정 수립의 중요성
④ 바쁜 일상에서 여행이 필요한 이유
⑤ 디지털 카메라로 멋진 여행 사진 찍는 법
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to give her guitar lessons
② to make a talent show poster
③ to return a guitar to her teacher
④ to play a song for a charity bazaar
⑤ to serve food in the school cafeteria
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $115 ② $120 ③ $125 ④ $130 ⑤ $145
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 비타민 D 보충제의 올바른 보관방법을 조언하려고
② 비타민 D 보충제 과다 복용의 위험성을 경고하려고
③ 일상생활에서 비타민 D의 충분한 섭취를 권장하려고
④ 비타민 D 결핍 시 발생하는 증상들에 대해 알리려고
⑤ 햇빛을 통한 비타민 D의 체내 형성 과정을 설명하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to order frames for her eyeglasses
② to choose new sunglasses for her
③ to retest her eyesight
④ to confirm the price of her order
⑤ to repair the frames of her eyeglasses
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
① 소방서 ② 주유소
③ 자전거 대여소 ④ 자동차 운전학원
⑤ 중고차 판매점
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 경찰관 - 제보자
② 세탁소 주인 - 고객
③ 옷가게 점원 - 손님
④ 식당 종업원 - 요리사
⑤ 카드회사 상담원 - 회원
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 추천서 복사하기
② 추천서의 내용 수정하기
③ 우체국에서 등기 우편 수령하기
④ 대학교를 방문하여 추천서 접수하기
⑤ 추천서의 사본 제출 가능 여부 확인하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 수강할 요리 강좌를
고르시오.
12. 노트북 컴퓨터의 반납에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 7월 15일까지 반납해야 한다.
② 반납 장소는 1층의 멀티미디어실이다.
③ 반납 전 바이러스 방지 프로그램을 실행해야 한다.
④ 예치금은 반납 당일 돌려받게 된다.
⑤ 반납 지연 시 연체료는 $10이다.
제 3 교시
2 외국어(영어) 영역
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① That’s the main reason I bought it.
② I think that I shouldn’t have bought it online.
③ It’s because I need to register for a language program.
④ I wish I could speak as many different languages as you.
⑤ I also want to be a reporter for Internet-based newspapers.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① That’s a relief. I thought the test was important.
② I have the same book in my locker. I’ll go and get it.
③ Oh, I see. But I think it would be better not to drop the class.
④ I understand your situation. Can I reserve a room for you?
⑤ I agree. I think we should respect the copyright law.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I’ll cancel the reserved tickets through the website.
② Sure. I think I’ll enjoy the musical as much as you did.
③ Why not? I’ll check the theater reviews next week.
④ You should have seen it before the dental appointment.
⑤ Okay. I’ll check and let you know about the tickets.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Susie가 Mr. Adams에게 할 말로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Susie:
① I found the perfect costume for Juliet.
② I don’t think I’m talented at writing scripts.
③ I’m having trouble conveying the right feelings.
④ I wonder who will get the lead role in the play.
⑤ I didn’t expect that movie would attract so many people.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
I have always been a huge fan of Redbug Cameras.
However, when I purchased your newest model, the
Superimage 2000, I could not have been more disappointed.
I acquired it on June 3rd of this year and it does not
function correctly. The camera lens does not focus properly
and the resulting photos are blurry and unclear. I went to the
local service center to get it repaired, but the poor service
I received there only complicated the problem. I am
extremely frustrated with the poor quality repairs that were
made in addition to the overall inferior quality of the
camera. I insist on receiving a full refund. Enclosed is a
copy of the original receipt and the repair bill.
① 환불을 요구하기 위하여
② 렌즈 수리를 의뢰하기 위하여
③ 신제품으로의 교환을 요청하기 위하여
④ 품질 개선 방향을 제안하기 위하여
⑤ 구입 방법을 문의하기 위하여
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Henri Matisse came late to painting, having trained to be
a lawyer to please his father. While he was in the hospital
recovering from surgery, his mother brought ① him a box
of paints and a how-to book, and the world lost an attorney
and gained an artist. “It was as if ② I had been called,” he
remembered. “Henceforth I did not lead my life. It led me.”
Matisse left for Paris to study art, with his father shouting,
“Do you want ③ me to see you starve?” He gained fame
as leader of the Fauves’ 1905 show. In 1917 Matisse began
to spend winters in Vence, where he donated a chapel of
④ his own design that is one of the most moving religious
buildings in Europe. After local nuns nursed ⑤ him through
a serious illness in the 1940s, the grateful Matisse devoted
himself to every detail of the chapel.
* Fauve: 야수파 화가
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
Deseada is a small island which belongs to the Lesser
Antilles. This island is said to have obtained its name
from the desire Christopher Columbus felt of seeing land
on his second voyage in 1493. It is twelve miles in length
and six miles in width. The part which looks to the north
is lower than (A) it / that which looks to the south. The
island abounds greatly in iguanas, and in a species of
birds called fragatas. There is a deep cavern on the
island, containing the bones and arms of the Indians,
who, it is supposed, (B) was / were buried there. In 1762,
this island was taken by the English, (C) who / where
restored it the following year to the French by the Peace of
Paris, and since that time it has been in the possession
of the latter.
(A) (B) (C)
① it …… was …… who
② it …… were …… where
③ that …… was …… who
④ that …… were …… who
⑤ that …… were …… where
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
If you’ve ever gone snorkeling, you may ① have seen an
amazing sight: an entire school of fish suddenly changes
direction as one unit. The same goes for flocks of birds. So
are they all following the commands of a leader? Researchers
have determined that there is no leader or controlling force.
Rather, the individual fish or bird is reacting ② almost
instantly to the movements of its neighbors in the school or
flock. ③ Any individual can initiate a movement, such as a
change in direction, and this sends out a “maneuver wave,”
which spreads through the group at an astounding speed.
Because individuals can see, or sense, the wave ④ coming
toward them, they are ready to react more quickly than they
would without such advance notice. ⑤ That appears to us as
simultaneous is actually a kind of “follow your neighbor”
behavior moving faster than the eye can see.
* maneuver: 움직임
[22～23] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. To require perfection is to invite paralysis. The pattern
is predictable: as you see error in what you have done, you
steer your work toward what you imagine you can do
perfectly. You cling ever more tightly to what you already
know you can do ― away from risk and exploration, and
possibly further from the work of your heart. You find
reasons to delay, since to not work is to not make mistakes.
Believing that your work should be perfect, you gradually
become convinced that you cannot do it. (You are correct.)
Sooner or later, since you cannot do what you are trying to
do, you quit. And in one of those little ironies of life, only
the pattern itself achieves perfection ― a perfect death spiral:
you misdirect your work; you stall; you quit.
① 지나친 모험심을 멀리해야 한다.
② 완벽에 집착하면 일을 그르친다.
③ 기존 방식에서도 배울 점이 있다.
④ 처음부터 완벽한 계획을 세워야 한다.
⑤ 서두르지 않아야 실수를 줄일 수 있다.
23. A man standing on the street corner selling “nonbreakable”
pens suddenly finds that the one he is demonstrating with
breaks in half. He stops for a moment, turns to the crowd,
and declares, “Now I’ll show you what the inside looks
like.” Laughter can turn any disadvantage into an advantage.
People who know this not only look for some positive aspect
in their misfortunes but actually go one step further. After
their initial shock, they gather their resources, overcome their
problem, and see opportunities where most of us fail to see
them. Moreover, many who have experienced a major loss
often go on to achieve remarkable feats in spite of their
hardships, because they focus on what they can gain from
their circumstance rather than on what they have lost. They
believe in the old cliché that every cloud has a silver lining,
and they actively seek the advantage in their disadvantage.
① 유머로 대인 관계를 개선하라.
② 자신의 약점을 인식하라.
③ 허황된 꿈을 꾸지 마라.
④ 위기를 기회로 만들어라.
⑤ 사소한 이익에 연연하지 마라.
[24～28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. The sun is slowly getting brighter as its core contracts and
heats up. In a billion years it will be about 10 percent brighter
than today, heating the planet to an uncomfortable degree.
Water evaporating from the oceans may set off a runaway
greenhouse effect that turns Earth into a damp version of
Venus, wrapped permanently in a thick, white blanket of cloud.
Or the transformation may take some time and be more gentle,
with an increasingly hot and cloudy atmosphere able to shelter
microbial life for some time. Either way, water will escape into
the stratosphere and be broken down by UV light into oxygen
and hydrogen. Oxygen will be left in the stratosphere ―
perhaps misleading aliens into thinking the planet is still
inhabited ― while the hydrogen is light enough to escape into
space. So our water will gradually .
* microbial: 미생물의 ** stratosphere: 성층권
① leak away ② be frozen ③ flow over
④ get polluted ⑤ accumulate
25. Imagine a child playing on the beach below a cliff. He finds
a cave, and full of excitement, goes in. Suddenly fear seizes
him. In the deep dark of the cave, he cannot see the way ahead.
What is frightening him is the sense of the unknown stretching
into the black distance. Worries can be like this. Our anxiety
is not about something specific, but more of a sense that
unknown and uncertain possibilities may be out of sight far
ahead. We can stop these worries from growing. A powerful
torch or flashlight could have shown the child the limits of
the cave. We can by
asking: “What is the worst that can happen?” More often than
not, the worst that we fear is much less terrible than our vague,
unarticulated fear. Once we know the worst, we can face it
directly and work out more sensibly what to do.
① hide our fears
② increase our uncertainties
③ place limits on our worries
④ share specific worries with others
⑤ differentiate reality from the ideal
26. People have found many ways to reduce stress or control
their responses to it. Possibilities include special breathing
routines, exercise, meditation, and distraction, as well as
trying to deal with the problem that caused the stress.
Social support is one of the most powerful methods of
coping with stress, and researchers have demonstrated its
effectiveness by brain measurements as well as people’s
self-reports. In one study, happily married women were
given moderately painful shocks to their ankles. On various
trials, they held the hand of their husband, a man they did
not know, or no one. Holding the husband’s hand reduced
the response in several brain areas. Holding the hand of an
unknown man reduced the response a little, on the average,
but not as much as holding the husband’s hand. In short, as
expected, brain responses correspond to people’s self-reports
that .
① holding hands makes them feel friendlier
② exercise and meditation lessen ankle pain
③ stimulating the brain induces happier feelings
④ what matters the most is how to measure stress
⑤ social support from a loved one helps reduce stress
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
27. Lifeline infrastructures are vital systems that support a
nation’s economy and quality of life. Modern economies
rely on the ability to move goods, people, and information
safely and reliably. Adding to their importance is that
many of the lifeline systems serve vital roles in disaster
recovery. Consequently, it is of the utmost importance to
government, business, and the public at large that the
flow of services provided by a nation’s infrastructure
continues unimpeded in the face of a broad range of
natural and technological hazards. The linkage between
systems and services is critical to any discussion of
infrastructure. Although it is the performance of the
hardware (i.e., the highways, pipes, and transmission lines)
that is of immediate concern following an earthquake, it
is actually the loss of services that these systems provide
that is the real loss to the public. Therefore, a high
priority in protecting these systems from hazards is
ensuring ___________________________________.
① an early alarm system for economic crises
② the durability and stability of transmission lines
③ the continuity, or at least the rapid restoration, of service
④ a prompt mobilization of experts for disaster control
⑤ the maintenance and expansion of lifeline systems
28. Essentially the same structural forms of politics can
nevertheless take on very different “flavors.” For example,
a dictatorship can, in theory, be brutal or benevolent;
anarchy can, in theory, consist of “mutual aid” or a “war
of all against all” that proceeds in the absence of any rule
of law whatsoever; democracies can and typically are
distinguished in terms of the extent to which they are
socially oriented as opposed to individualistically oriented.
Thus, whatever our answer to the “What is the best
structural form of politics?” question, we still want to know
what “flavor” this structural form of politics ought to have
since . Indeed,
this is precisely why we vote within a democratic structure: to
determine the “flavor” we want that democratic structure to
have. [3점]
① voters ultimately determine a political structure
② political structures, in fact, outweigh political “flavors”
③ the best structural form of politics is not easy to determine
④ political structure, by itself, does not determine political content
⑤ each structural form of politics must be valued independently
[29～30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
29. The greatest errors in judging a person are made by his
parents; this is a fact, but how is one to explain it? Do the
parents have too much experience of the child, and can they
no longer compose it into a unity? We notice that travelers
in a strange land grasp correctly the common, distinctive
traits of a people only in the first period of their stay; the
more they get to know a people, the more they (A)
how to see what is typical and distinctive about it. As soon
as they see up close, they stop being farsighted. Might
parents judge their children wrongly because they have
never stood far enough off from them? A quite different
explanation would be the following: people tend to stop
thinking about things that are closest to them, and simply
(B) them. When parents are required to judge their
children, it is perhaps their customary thoughtlessness that
makes them judge so mistakenly. [3점]
(A) (B)
① forget …… accept
② learn …… ignore
③ seek …… conceal
④ neglect …… analyze
⑤ understand …… embrace
30. Persuasion is the strategic use of language to move an
audience. It works by appealing to our emotion as well as
by appealing to our reason. Therefore, sometimes you
may try to appeal to an emotion in your audience by
imitating it: hysteria by being hysterical, anger by raging.
(A) , you may try to re-create the circumstances
which excited in you the emotions that you want to excite in
your audience. However, the best measure is to appear calm,
detached, thoroughly in control of your feelings, while
you are controlling your narrative for your own purposes.
Even your choice of words should be selective; you must pay
attention to their nuances. If you address a labor union,
(B) , it will make a great difference whether you
refer to the members as workers, comrades, or just people.
(A) (B)
① In short …… in addition
② By contrast …… in addition
③ Hence …… however
④ Nevertheless …… for example
⑤ Also …… for example
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
The growing season in the Arctic region is short as well
as cool, and plants must make the most of what warmth there
is. One (A) addiction / adaptation by many arctic plants to
the short growing season is wintergreen, or semi-evergreen,
leaves. They are leaves that develop late in the summer and
survive through winter without drying up and dying. They
remain green and can start photosynthesis as soon as the
weather is warm enough in spring, before there has been time
for the new season’s leaves to expand and start functioning.
They finally (B) wither / prosper after the new leaves have
taken over. There are many common arctic plants with
wintergreen leaves. Among them are arctic poppy, thrift,
alpine saxifrage, and several kinds of chickweeds and starworts.
Wintergreen leaves are not (C) limited / accustomed to the
Arctic; many plants of the northern forests have them, too.
(A) (B) (C)
① addiction …… wither …… accustomed
② addiction …… prosper …… limited
③ adaptation …… wither …… limited
④ adaptation …… prosper …… limited
⑤ adaptation …… prosper …… accustomed
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Organic food production is growing by leaps and bounds.
Many consumers are willing to pay premium prices for organic
foods, convinced that they are helping the earth and eating
healthier. Some experts say, however, that organic farming has
some ① drawbacks. One of the most frequent criticisms is
that the crop yields of organic farms are much ② lower than
those of traditional farms. That’s because organic fields suffer
more from weeds and insects than ③ conventional fields.
Another argument often offered by experts is that organic
farming can supply food for niche markets of ④ wealthy
consumers but cannot feed billions of hungry people around
the globe. Only the careful use of chemical inputs, not the
costly organic methods, can help ⑤ reduce food production
significantly in the countries facing hunger.
* niche market: 틈새시장
[33～34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. What everyday rules for behavior guide parents’ efforts
to socialize their toddlers and preschool-age children? To
answer this question, Gralinski and Kopp observed and
interviewed mothers and their children in these age groups.
They found that for fifteen-month-olds, mothers’ rules and
requests centered on ensuring the children’s safety and, to a
lesser extent, protecting the families’ possessions from harm;
respecting basic social niceties (“Don’t bite”; “No kicking”);
and learning to delay getting what they wanted. As children’s
ages and cognitive sophistication increased, the numbers and
kinds of prohibitions and requests expanded from the original
focus on child protection and interpersonal issues to family
routines, self-care, and other concerns regarding the child’s
independence. By the time children were three, a new quality
of rule emerged: “Do not scream in a restaurant, run around
naked in front of company, or pick your nose.”
① changes in maternal rules according to children’s age
② limitations of discipline for children’s socialization
③ parents’ concerns about children’s independence
④ importance of parents’ anger management skills
⑤ effects of thinking ability on children’s socialization
34. Ancient Greek and Roman costume is essentially draped,
and presents a traditional stability and permanence. While it
received certain fashions over the centuries, it never
underwent any major transformation. Léon Heuzey, the
pioneer of the study of classical costume, set forth with
exemplary clarity its two basic principles: the first is that
Classical costume has no form in itself, as it consisted of
a simple rectangular piece of cloth woven in varying sizes
according to its intended use and the height of the customer,
without differentiation between the sexes; the second is that
this cloth is always draped, never shaped or cut, and was
worn round the body in accordance with definite rules. Thus
it was always fluid and ‘live.’ It is notable that we find no
evidence in Classical times of tailors or dressmakers: the
word itself barely exists in Greek or Latin.
* drape: 주름을 잡아 걸치다
① basic characteristics of Classical costume
② significant transformations in Classical costume
③ the greatness of Léon Heuzey’s study of classical costume
④ the origin of ancient Greek and Roman costume
⑤ difficulties in defining Classical costume
35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
This graph shows the number of U.S. Science and
Engineering (S & E) doctoral degrees earned by students
from China, India, South Korea, and Taiwan from 1987 to
2007. ① In 1987, Taiwan had the largest number of S & E
doctoral degree recipients from U.S. institutions while China
had the least. ② However, China quickly caught up to the
other countries by 1990, and has since produced the most
U.S. S & E doctoral degree recipients of the four Asian
countries. ③ Between 2001 and 2005, more U.S. S & E
doctorates were given to South Korean students than to their
Indian peers. ④ What is noticeable is that since the early
1990s, all four countries have consistently showed a steady
increase in the number of U.S. S & E doctoral degree
recipients. ⑤ From 1987 to 2007, none of the four Asian
countries broke the barrier of receiving 5,000 U.S. S & E
doctorates in a single year, but China came closest when it
received 4,500 in 2007.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
36. Patience Lovell Wright에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Patience Lovell Wright was a successful artist who specialized
in creating wax figures of famous people. Although Patience
had received little formal education and what she knew
about art was mostly self-taught, she was very skilled, and
her work quickly became popular. She was also a devoted
Patriot. When the war broke out, she immediately began to
work for the Continental Army. She easily picked up
information not only from her clients but also from women
with whom she socialized often. Patience thrived on danger.
Toward the end of the American Revolution, she became
deeply involved in a plot to overthrow the king. Without
financial backing, the plotters were forced to abandon their
plan. Patience consoled herself by recognizing the part she
had played in the American Revolution as one of the
Patriots’ most colorful spies.
* Patriot: (독립전쟁 당시의) 애국단원
① 평범한 사람들의 밀랍 모형을 만드는 성공한 예술가였다.
② 정규 교육을 통해 예술에 관한 대부분을 알았다.
③ 전쟁이 끝날 무렵부터 Continental Army에서 일했다.
④ 종종 친교를 나누었던 여성들로부터 정보를 쉽게 얻었다.
⑤ 왕을 폐위시키려는 음모에 가담하지 않았다.
37. jerboa에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The small jerboa lives in deserts across the world. Jerboas
have big eyes and, like many desert animals, they can see
very well at night. In the late evening, they come out of
their holes and look for food ― mostly seeds and plants.
Jerboas are very well adapted to life in the desert. Some
jerboas do not need to drink, because they get water from
their food. In the hot summer, some jerboas sleep under the
sand for two or three months. Jerboas also live in cold
deserts like the Gobi. Here, they sleep in their holes in the
winter and stay away from the snow. Jerboas can move
very fast across the sand. They have huge back legs and
they can jump up to three meters in one move. They do
this when they need to run away from other animals.
① 눈이 크고 밤에 매우 잘 볼 수 있다.
② 주로 씨앗과 식물을 먹이로 찾는다.
③ 추운 사막에서도 산다.
④ 모래 위에서는 움직임이 둔해진다.
⑤ 커다란 뒷다리를 가지고 있다.
38. 다음 글에서 ‘I’가 겪은 심경의 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
I am a female dolphin who lives in an aquarium. One day
I got so badly injured that I couldn’t swim and come up for
air. So my trainers attached bottles to me to act as floats.
I didn’t want to live the rest of my life being supported by
these bottles. I was so aimless and dispirited. I merely
floated about and was sure I wasn’t going to live for very
long. Seeing my depression, my trainers brought in a male
dolphin. At first I ignored him but later began to show
interest. He tried to help me swim, pushing me from under
and bringing me to the surface. Despite my injury, I began
making an effort to swim. Soon, the bottles were removed
and I recovered completely. It felt great to swim on my
own again. We became inseparable, swimming joyfully
around together and showing signs of affection.
① hopeless → happy
② satisfied → worried
③ confused → envious
④ alarmed → regretful
⑤ nervous → disheartened
[39～40] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. The streets of New York are home to numerous trucks,
vans, stands, and pushcarts all selling food. Most of the
vendors are immigrants bringing street versions of the
world’s diverse food traditions to this already international
metropolis. You can snack on Jamaican goat patties, sample
Chinese noodles, take a bite of Egyptian falafel, or enjoy
vegetarian Sri Lankan curry. New York even has an annual
award ceremony, the Vendy Awards, for the best sidewalk
chefs. Part of the fun is tracking down the best offerings.
Trucks and vans often visit different areas of New York on
different days; some chefs operate only at certain times of
day or only on weekends. Even stands with regular spots and
hours occasionally vanish, as the owner finds a better spot
or takes a week off. Follow the crowds, or ask locals for
information ― hotel doormen will often let you into the
secrets of a neighborhood’s best vendors.
① New York: A Hub of Grocery Transportation
② Vendy Awards for the Best-Selling Street Food
③ Origins of International Street Foods in New York
④ New York: A Paradise for Street Food Lovers
⑤ Famous Street Food for New York Drivers
40. Fourteenth-century approaches to music had a profound
and continuing impact on music in later centuries. Perhaps
most significant was the invention of a precise and
unambiguous notation that could record a wide variety of
rhythms and allowed music to be distributed in writing and
performed accurately wherever it went. We now take this
for granted when we play from notation and sight-read through
unfamiliar music, but it was a remarkable innovation in the
fourteenth century. Among its effects was that composers
could fix their music exactly as they wished it to be
performed, leading them to take pride in authorship. The
increased interest in the individual and in satisfying the
human senses that was characteristic of the age grew
stronger in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and has
remained important ever since.
① History of Music in Terms of Genre
② Authorship: Motivation for Innovations
③ Greatest Composers of 14th Century Music
④ The Innovative Invention of Musical Instruments
⑤ Musical Notation: Its Invention and Contributions
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
[41～42] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
41. According to sociologists, one of the most widespread and
basic norms of human culture is embodied in the rule for
reciprocation. ① The rule requires that one person try to
repay, in kind, what another person has provided. ② By
obligating the recipient of an act to repayment in the future,
the rule for reciprocation allows one individual to give
something to another with confidence that it is not being lost.
③ Sociologists have a desire to be consistent with their
words, beliefs, attitudes, and deeds. ④ This sense of future
obligation within the rule makes possible the development
of various kinds of continuing relationships, transactions, and
exchanges that are beneficial to the society. ⑤ Consequently,
all members of the society are trained from childhood to
follow the rule or suffer serious social disapproval.
* reciprocation: 보답
42. Several plane crashes and near crashes have been attributed
to dangerous downward wind bursts known as wind shear.
These wind bursts generally result from high-speed downdrafts
in the turbulence of thunderstorms, but they can occur in
clear air when rain evaporates high above the ground. ① The
downdraft spreads out when it hits the ground and forms an
inward circular pattern. ② A plane entering the pattern
experiences an unexpected upward headwind that lifts the
plane. ③ Special radar systems are being installed at major
airports to detect the location of unpredictable thunderstorms.
④ To resist it, the pilot often cuts speed and lowers the
plane’s nose to compensate. ⑤ Further into the circular
pattern, the wind quickly turns downward, and an airplane
can suddenly lose altitude and possibly crash when it is near
the ground, as upon landing.
* wind shear: 갑자기 방향이 바뀌는 돌풍
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
The underlying idea of world history is that the interaction
among human societies resembles not the relationships
among billiard balls, but rather among bacteria.
(A) Similarly, human societies in contact affect each other’s
development. World historians, recognizing this, seek
to understand human history through studying both
developments within societies and the way in which
societies relate to each other.
(B) Bacteria, however, fundamentally shape each other as
they interact. Because the membranes covering bacteria
are full of pores, bacteria can exchange genetic
information and can even fundamentally alter each
other’s basic make-up when they touch.
(C) Billiard balls rolling around the table may collide and
affect each other’s trajectories, but they do not actually
change each other: The eight ball is an eight ball even
after it is struck by the cue ball.
* membrane: 얇은 막 ** trajectory: 궤도
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
In one troop, a taste for caramels was developed by
introducing this new food into the diet of young minors,
low on the status ladder.
We are not the only species to give sometimes wrongheaded
deference to those in authority positions. ( ① ) In monkey
colonies, where rigid dominance hierarchies exist, beneficial
innovations do not spread quickly through the group unless
they are taught first to a dominant animal. ( ② ) When a
lower animal is taught the new concept first, the rest of the
colony remains mostly oblivious to its value. ( ③ ) One
study on the introduction of new food tastes to Japanese
monkeys provides a nice illustration. ( ④ ) The taste for
caramels inched slowly up the ranks: A year and a half later,
only 51 percent of the colony had acquired it, and still none
of the leaders. ( ⑤ ) Contrast this with what happened in a
second troop where wheat was introduced first to the leader:
Wheat eating ― to this point unknown to these monkeys ―
spread through the whole colony within four hours.
* deference: 복종 ** oblivious: 알아차리지 못하는
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
All art is creation, regardless of how closely the
imitation approximates the original. Even the most
rigorous attempt to create an absolute likeness is
ultimately selective. Doing a portrait, for example, the
artist may ask the subject to look serious, not smile ―
selecting a certain aspect of the person. We know Mona
Lisa Giaconda, the subject of the most famous portrait
in the world, through her mysterious smile; but we will
never know what the entire person was like. The
treasure of art, however, is that its reality lives forever.
The final product is really an addition to reality, not
simply a way of totally reproducing it. The artist always
contributes something new, something that never was
put together in precisely that way before. Leonardo’s
Mona Lisa is not Mona Lisa. The latter has long since
gone to her reward; the former will never die.
󰀻
Every work of art, no matter how precisely it (A)
the original, is not a mere reproduction, but a unique
creation that exists on its own and never (B) .
(A) (B)
① reveals …… compromises
② imitates …… perishes
③ illustrates …… returns
④ recalls …… stands alone
⑤ verifies …… goes unnoticed
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
The first memory I have of visiting a working artist’s
studio is a trip my family took to the studio of (a) Grey
Stone, a potter who made the dinnerware set our whole
family has cherished for many years. When I was about
five years old, our family drove down to his studio
with several miscellaneous pieces of handmade pottery
from the family collection. We wanted Grey to make a
set that would draw together the pieces we had collected
over the years.
(B)
A favorite family pastime then developed when guests
came over and we got out the “good stoneware.” Before
my father served the food, (b) he would encourage
guests to flip over their plates to read what was on the
underside. Thanks to his influence, this childhood pastime
has since become a habit. Even today, I still flip over
all handmade pottery pieces as soon as I first touch
them to see if there might be an inscription or at least
to look for the potter’s mark.
(C)
Even at that young age, looking around Grey’s house
and studio complex, I thought about how great it was that
he could work at home, with (c) his family around him,
and produce things with his own hands. After accepting
our request, he immediately started working on one of the
pieces. Taking a prepared lump of clay, (d) he put it on
his treadle wheel. It was so fascinating to see how
ordinary clay could turn into a beautiful pot.
(D)
I couldn’t get that process out of my head so I looked
forward to our return trip several months later to pick up
the finished dinnerware. One of my favorite features of
each piece Grey had made was that, upon close
inspection, one could see that the pieces had been
individually inscribed with some marks on the underside,
just inside the trimmed foot. On each of those pieces,
with the large foot area, there was room for the
inscription not only of (e) the potter’s signature, address,
and date, but also a unique saying or phrase.
46. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
47. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
48. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 필자는 다섯 살 무렵에 Grey Stone의 작업실을 방문하였다.
② 필자의 가족은 도자기 그릇을 수집해오고 있었다.
③ 필자는 아버지의 영향으로 접시를 뒤집어 보는 습관을 갖게
되었다.
④ 필자는 Grey Stone의 집 방문 시 그가 작업하는 것을 보지
못했다.
⑤ Grey Stone이 만들어 준 그릇의 밑바닥에는 표식이 새겨져
있었다.
[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
All his life, Chris Greicius dreamed of becoming a
police officer. But there was a major obstacle standing
in his way. He had leukemia and was not expected to
make it to adulthood. When he was seven years old,
Chris’s disease got worse. That’s when a family friend,
Tommy Austin, arranged for Chris to come as close as
he could to . He called
Officer Ron Cox and arranged for Chris to spend a day
with some police officers.
When the day arrived, Chris was welcomed by three
squad cars and a police motorcycle ridden by Officer
Frank Shankwitz. Then, he was treated to a ride in a
police helicopter. The officers finished the day by
swearing Chris in as the first ― and only ― honorary
state trooper. The next day, Cox presented Chris with an
official Arizona Highway Patrol uniform. With a smile
that lit up the room, he accepted it.
Two days later, Chris died in the hospital, his uniform
close at hand. Shankwitz was very sad, but grateful that
he had helped Chris. He also realized that there were
many other children like Chris. That prompted Shankwitz
to co-found the Make-A-Wish Foundation. It has now
become the largest wish-granting organization in the world,
enlarging the experiences of more than eighty thousand
children.
* leukemia: 백혈병
49. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① A Boy Trooper in Uniform Dies of Leukemia
② A Boy’s Wish Blossoms into a Foundation
③ A Badge of Honor Saves Thousands of Children
④ A Lingering Illness: Can the Boy Survive It?
⑤ An Everlasting Smile: The Story of a Police Officer
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① living his dream
② making a promise
③ visiting his relatives
④ recovering from his illness
⑤ helping other children in the hospital

1
8
2013학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 선풍기를 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① proud ② grateful ③ confident
④ frustrated ⑤ indifferent
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 기업화된 동물 사육의 문제점
② 채식 위주 음식 섭취의 장점
③ 축산업 지원의 필요성
④ 건강을 위한 식단 구성 방법
⑤ 채소 재배와 환경보호의 관계
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 설문 참가자에게 전화하기
② 새로운 설문 문항 만들기
③ 설문 자료 분석하기
④ 사회 과목 보고서 제출하기
⑤ 학급 친구 전화번호 알아보기
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $45 ② $81 ③ $90 ④ $95 ⑤ $100
6. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 미술 과제물 제출 방법을 안내하려고
② 국제기구 주관의 전시회를 홍보하려고
③ 금연의 날 지정의 필요성을 설명하려고
④ 금연 포스터 공모전 참여를 독려하려고
⑤ 병원 설립을 위한 모금 행사를 소개하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to subscribe to his magazine
② to write a response to the article
③ to perform plastic surgery on him
④ to shorten her article for the magazine
⑤ to email her hospital information to him
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오. [1점]
① 농장 ② 주차장 ③ 지하철
④ 구내식당 ⑤ 정육점
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 약사 － 환자 ② 동물원 조련사 － 관람객
③ 보건 교사 － 학생 ④ 슈퍼마켓 점원 － 손님
⑤ 수의사 － 애완동물 주인
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to take old books to the Good Hands store
② to help reorganize the charity shop
③ to call the town recycling center
④ to return Amy’s books to her school
⑤ to exchange a bookshelf for a bigger one
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 예약할 캠프장을
고르시오.
12. 다음을 듣고, Pacific Language Learning에 관한 내용과
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 2010년에 만들어진 무료 프로그램이다.
② 중국어, 스페인어 그리고 프랑스어 과정이 있다.
③ 스마트폰을 통해서는 학습 도구를 제공하지 않는다.
④ 말하기 대회를 매년 12월에 개최한다.
⑤ 말하기 대회 우승자는 외국을 방문할 기회를 얻는다.
제 3 교시
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 외국어(영어) 영역
2
8
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Thanks to you, I managed to get the tickets.
② Well, let’s meet at the restaurant in one hour.
③ Great! I’m really looking forward to seeing you.
④ Really? You should have seen the show with me.
⑤ No thanks. I have to leave for New York right now.
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I bought tickets through the official website.
② You can take subway Line 5 to the stadium.
③ The Vikings beat their rival team last night.
④ I don’t know when they became fan club members.
⑤ I’ll get a helmet for you while you stay here in line.
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① There’s one in the basement.
② It’s a simple job to clean the sink.
③ My dad taught me how to tighten the nut.
④ Call a plumber to fix the toilet right away.
⑤ Please go to the hardware store for a new pipe.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Anita가 Mr. Robinson에게 할 말로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Anita:
① I’m calling to confirm that my flight will be on time.
② I’m so thrilled to be staying with your family.
③ I’ll pick you up as soon as you arrive.
④ I’d like to major in mechanical engineering.
⑤ I’m afraid my plane will arrive later than expected.
18. 다음 편지를 쓴 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
Dear Mr. Johnson,
I can’t tell you how sorry I was to learn that the flood
caused almost total damage to your home. I can only
imagine what a terrible loss it must be. The very
prospect of losing everything and having to start all over
again would be overwhelming for anybody. That is why
I want to provide you with any assistance that I can. I
have an extra bedroom that you are welcome to use. As
your friends and neighbors join forces to support you in
your time of need, I’m sure that everything will seem a
little brighter with each new day. In the meantime, please
take good care of yourself.
With all good wishes,
Richard Jackson
① to offer help ② to ask for advice
③ to express thanks ④ to give a warning
⑤ to make an apology
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
A king once boarded a galley ship. As he passed the crew
of slaves, ① he asked several of them what their offenses
were. Almost every man claimed he was innocent. They laid
the blame on someone else. One young fellow, however,
spoke out, “Sire, ② I deserve to be here. I stole some money.
No one is at fault but myself. I’m guilty.” Upon hearing this,
the king seized ③ him by the shoulder and shouted, “You
scoundrel! What are ④ you doing here with all these honest
men? Get out of their company at once!” He was then set
free. The key to this prisoner’s freedom was the admission
of ⑤ his guilt.
* galley ship: 갤리선(옛날 노예나 죄수들에게 젓게 한 돛배)
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
Remember what it was like to report on a daily deadline
for the first time? Or to interview a city official for the first
time? Or to begin to maneuver a desktop publishing
program? We know that the journalism program at our
college was a source of (A) many / much of these firsts for
you. We’re still providing these important first experiences
to budding young writers and editors. And we’re hoping
you’ll be willing to help these students make it through the
program. As you know, the costs of providing first-rate
education just keep going up. We’ve done everything we can
(B) contain / to contain costs without compromising quality.
One of those things is to set up a scholarship fund for
students with special financial needs. We hope you would
consider contributing generously to our fund. You’ll get a
great feeling (C) known / knowing you’re helping support
the formation of future leaders in the profession.
(A) (B) (C)
① many …… contain …… known
② many …… contain …… knowing
③ many …… to contain …… knowing
④ much …… contain …… knowing
⑤ much …… to contain …… known
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Today, the world of innovation is far different from what
it was a century ago. The days of the solitary inventor working
on his own are gone. To oversimplify, basic ideas bubble out
of universities and laboratories ① in which a group of
researchers work together: both major breakthroughs, like
understanding the genetic structure of life, and smaller
② ones, such as advances in mathematics or basic chemistry.
Traditionally, intellectual property has played little role in
③ promoting basic science. Academia believes in “open
architecture,” meaning ④ that the knowledge that research
produces should be made public to encourage innovation. The
great scientists are driven by an inner quest to understand the
nature of the universe; the extrinsic reward that matters most
to them ⑤ are the recognition of their peers.
[22～23] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. We often dismiss new ideas that could further our growth
simply because they do not fit within the general framework
of our preconceived notions and self-concepts. An enormous
amount of time is spent simply reacting. It’s as if we are
robots programmed to respond on cue to whatever demands
the least time and attention, and disregard anything that
requires putting in extra time and energy to think. We skim
over the surface thoughtlessly. But we must acknowledge
that thinking well is a time-consuming process. We can’t
expect instant results. We have to slow down a bit and take
the time to contemplate and meditate. It is the only path to
a more meaningful and efficient existence.
① 우선순위에 따라 일을 처리하라.
② 위기의 순간에는 과감히 결정하라.
③ 충분한 시간을 갖고 심사숙고하라.
④ 선입견을 버리고 객관성을 유지하라.
⑤ 결정한 일은 지체하지 말고 실행하라.
23. Masks are too heavy to uphold indefinitely, and no matter
how well you believe you are disguising yourself, others
always know. The consequences are that you waste energy,
sacrifice productivity, and lose people’s trust. In our study,
all of the CEOs were concerned that dropping their masks
would make them appear weak. In every case, however, the
leader’s subordinates perceived the removal of the mask as
an act of strength and courage. This, in turn, encouraged a
culture where those subordinates did the same, creating a
snowball effect. Some of the ways we helped the CEOs
remove their masks were to actually name the masks,
explore the significant personal and professional costs of
upholding them, and ask the CEOs to reflect on the leader
they most admired. At this point each of the CEOs was ready
to rebuild a leadership identity based on values, strengths,
and ambitions.
① CEO가 되기 위해서는 전문성을 갖추어야 한다.
② CEO는 열정적이고, 희생적이며, 신뢰감을 주어야 한다.
③ CEO는 부하 직원에게 나약한 모습을 보여서는 안 된다.
④ CEO는 자신을 그대로 보여줌으로써 리더십을 재정립할 수 있다.
⑤ CEO의 리더십은 자신이 존경하는 지도자를 모방함으로써 생긴다.
[24～28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
24. When we behave irrationally, our behavior usually seems
reasonable to us. When challenged, the mind says (to itself),
“Why are these people giving me a hard time? I’m just doing
what makes sense. Any reasonable person would see that!”
In short, we naturally think that our thinking is fully justified.
As far as we can tell, we are only doing what is right and
proper and reasonable. Any fleeting thoughts suggesting that
we might be at fault typically are by more
powerful self-justifying thoughts: “I don’t mean any harm.
I’m just! I’m fair! It’s the others who are wrong!” It is
important to recognize this nature of the human mind as its
natural state. In other words, humans don’t have to learn
self-justifying, self-serving, self-deceptive thinking and
behavior. These patterns are innate in every one of us.
① spread ② unveiled ③ fortified
④ overcome ⑤ authorized
25. At some point, these days, a parent realizes his or her
child is tending left. The parent panics. Will the child be
made fun of? Struggle with writing? Be left out? In the past,
the parent would have done everything possible to exorcise
the tendency. Today, more and more parents shrug their
shoulders, saying it’s okay, maybe even something special.
Or their attempts to discourage it are milder. This is not an
isolated reaction. It’s part of the larger trend toward
. From giving
children extra time to develop into kindergarteners to
accommodating their vegetarian appetites, parents today are
taking their cues from children, rather than the other way
around. Left-handedness is just the tip of the iceberg ― in
today’s world, parenting is about letting your child develop
into his or her own person, not about trying to stamp him
or her into a mold of conformity.
* exorcise: 몰아내다
① neglecting, rather than enhancing, personal traits
② celebrating, rather than suppressing, individuality in kids
③ abandoning, rather than administering, parental supervision
④ analyzing, rather than overlooking, their child’s mischief
⑤ advocating, rather than blaming, early education
26. It is a common misconception among many musicians and
non-musicians alike that .
This is not surprising as it is natural to associate music with
the sounds that create the melody, rather than with the quiet
spaces between the notes. Because rests are silent, people
often misinterpret these empty spaces as unimportant. But,
imagine what would happen if a song was made up of only
notes, and no rests. Aside from the fact that the “rests would
be history” (pun intended), there would be a wall of sound
with no reference point or discernible backbone to the music.
This is because the spaces between the sounds provide a
baseline and contrast for the piece, and give music structure
and texture. In fact, it is a common saying among experienced
musicians that a full measure of rest can hold more music
than a full measure of blistering notes. [3점]
① notes are more important than rests
② rests provide a direct reference point to music
③ silence is no less meaningful than sound in music
④ melody is nothing more than a collection of sounds
⑤ structure and texture are the most crucial aspects of music
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 외국어(영어) 영역
4
8
27. Cost estimates follow from time estimates simply by
multiplying the hours required by the required labor rates.
Beware of . For
example, one major company has a policy that requires the
following personnel in order to remove an electric motor: a
tinsmith to remove the cover, an electrician to disconnect
the electrical supply, a millwright to unbolt the mounts, and
one or more laborers to remove the motor from its mount.
That situation is fraught with inefficiency and high labor
costs, since all four trades must be scheduled together, with
at least three people watching while the fourth is at work.
The cost will be at least four times what it could be and is
often greater if one of the trades does not show up on time.
* fraught: ～으로 가득 찬
① inefficiency caused by poor working conditions
② difficulty in financing high labor costs in business
③ differences in labor skills when working in groups
④ coordination problems where multiple crafts are involved
⑤ mismatch between personnel and equipment in production
28. Guys lost on unfamiliar streets often avoid asking for
directions from locals. We try to tough it out with map and
compass. Admitting being lost feels like admitting stupidity.
This is a stereotype, but it has a large grain of truth. It’s
also a good metaphor for a big overlooked problem in the
human sciences. We’re trying to find our way around the dark
continent of human nature. We scientists are being paid to
be the bus-driving tour guides for the rest of humanity. They
expect us to know our way around the human mind, but we
don’t. So we try to fake it, without asking the locals for
directions. We try to find our way from first principles of
geography (‘theory’), and from maps of our own making
(‘empirical research’). The roadside is crowded with locals,
and their brains are crowded with local knowledge, but we
are too arrogant and embarrassed to ask the way. So we drive
around in circles,
about where to find the scenic vistas that would entertain and
enlighten the tourists. [3점]
① waiting for the local brains to inquire
② accumulating and examining the locals’ knowledge
③ going against the findings of our empirical research
④ relying on passengers’ knowledge and experience
⑤ inventing and rejecting successive hypotheses
[29～30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
29. One day as he walked through the streets of London,
Thomas Hobbes, the seventeenth-century philosopher, came
upon an old, sickly man who was begging for money.
Hobbes, his heart touched, immediately gave the man a
generous offering. When asked by a friend if he would have
done the same had there been no religious dictum or
philosophical principle about helping the needy, Hobbes
replied that he would. His explanation: he felt some
(A) himself when he saw the man’s misery, and so
just as giving money to the man would relieve some of the
man’s suffering, it “does also ease me.” This tale suggests
that we have a bit of self-interest in relieving the misery of
others. One school of modern economic theory, following
Hobbes, argues that people give to charities in part because
of the (B) they get from imagining either the relief
of those they benefit or their own relief from alleviating their
sympathetic distress.
* alleviate: 완화시키다
(A) (B)
① pain …… pleasure
② contempt …… respect
③ doubt …… trust
④ humility …… dignity
⑤ hostility …… friendliness
30. While there are aesthetic and ethical reasons for
preserving biodiversity, there are practical considerations as
well. We depend on many other species for food, clothing,
shelter, oxygen, soil fertility ― the list goes on and on. In
the United States, 25% of all prescriptions from pharmacies
contain substances derived from plants. (A) , two
substances effective against Hodgkin’s disease and certain
other forms of cancer come from the rosy periwinkle, a
flowering plant native to the island of Madagascar.
Madagascar alone harbors some 8,000 species of flowering
plants. Unfortunately, Madagascar has lost 80% of its
forests and about 50% of its native species. Madagascar’s
dilemma represents that of much of the developing world.
The island is home to over 10 million people, most of
whom are desperately poor and hardly in a position to be
concerned with environmental conservation. (B)
the people of Madagascar as well as others around the
globe could derive vital benefits from the biodiversity that
is being destroyed.
(A) (B)
① In contrast …… Indeed
② In contrast …… Thus
③ In short …… Finally
④ For instance …… Yet
⑤ For instance …… Similarly
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
31. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Over the course of the past forty years, no country on earth
has cut its alcohol consumption more than France. While
consumption of beer and spirits has stayed basically steady
in France, the per capita consumption of alcohol from wine
① fell from 20 liters in 1962 to about 8 in 2001. One reason
for the dwindling wine consumption is the ② acceleration of
the French meal. In 1978, the average French meal lasted 82
minutes. ③ Plenty of time for half a bottle, if not a whole
bottle. Today, the average French meal has been slashed
down to 38 minutes. Wine is a ④ victim of the disappearance
of the leisurely meal. It is not the target of the change, but
the decline in wine consumption is a ⑤ cause of the
emergence of the faster, more modern, on-the-go lifestyle.
* spirits: 독한 술
32. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
One of the most commonly cited reasons for keeping a pet
animal is for the companionship it can provide. The general
term companionship usually translates into partaking in
shared activities, such as walking the dog, playing with the
cat. However, such behavioral interactions between humans
and pet animals are usually asymmetrically organized.
Humans tend to interact with their pets when they feel like
it, rather than (A) consistently / occasionally responding to
the animal’s demands for attention. In addition, it is often
observed that once interaction between humans and pets has
arisen, the termination of such interactional sequences
invariably (B) originates / separates from the human. This
suggests that activities like walking the dog and playing with
the cat only arise when time can be spared from the human
owner’s other commitments. Therefore, if one views activity
as a global concept ― involving instigation, performance, and
termination ― labeling certain forms of human-pet interaction
as shared activities may be (C) appealing / misleading .
* instigation: (～하도록) 부추김
(A) (B) (C)
① consistently …… originates …… appealing
② consistently …… originates …… misleading
③ consistently …… separates …… appealing
④ occasionally …… originates …… misleading
⑤ occasionally …… separates …… appealing
[33～34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. We sometimes encounter students who come to our offices
and ask how they could have worked so hard but still failed
our tests. They usually tell us that they read and reread the
textbook and their class notes, and that they thought they
understood everything well by the time of the exam. And they
probably did internalize some bits and pieces of the material,
but the illusion of knowledge led them to confuse the
familiarity they had gained from repeated exposure to the
concepts in the course with an actual understanding of them.
As a rule, reading text over and over again yields diminishing
returns in actual knowledge, but it increases familiarity and
fosters a false sense of understanding. Only by testing
ourselves can we actually determine whether or not we really
understand. That is one reason why teachers give tests, and
why the best tests probe knowledge at a deep level.
① positive impact of student counseling on study skills
② importance of familiarity in gaining actual understanding
③ relationship between reading and gaining high test scores
④ tests as a means to distinguish real understanding from
familiarity
⑤ necessity of internalizing reading materials to improve test
scores
34. Hundreds of species of small fishes exist in well-defined
social organizations called schools. Fish schools vary in size
from a few individuals to enormous populations extending
over several square kilometers. Schools usually consist of a
single species, with all members similar in size or age. For
small animals with no other means of individual defense,
schooling behavior provides a degree of protection. Predatory
fishes have less chance of encountering prey if the prey are
members of a school because the individuals of the prey
species are concentrated in compact units rather than
dispersed over a much larger area. Moreover, once a predator
encounters a school, satiation of the predator enables most
members of the school to escape unharmed. Large numbers
of fishes in a school may achieve additional survival
advantages by confusing predators with continually shifting
and changing positions; they might even discourage hungry
predators with the illusion of an impressively large and
formidable opponent.
* satiation: 물릴 정도로 먹음, 포만
① protective instincts of small fish species
② origin of social organizations in small fishes
③ fish schooling as a behavioral strategy for survival
④ necessity of fish farms to save endangered species
⑤ behavioral differences between predatory fishes and prey
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역
6
8
35. 다음 글에 드러난 Liz의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Over the sky a plump black cloud moved, erasing the
stars. At that moment, Liz heard a stealthy step far to her
left and immediately froze. She slowly released her knees
and straightened her head, the better to hear. The movement
stopped, and after a long moment began again. Liz saw a
dark figure creep into the open and draw near to the trees.
The figure stood so still and low to the ground that it might
have been a stump. She called softly, “Tim!” Hearing an
answering whistle, she went toward her son and, with tears
of delight, hugged him tightly.
① lonely → scared
② tense → relieved
③ sorrowful → ashamed
④ anticipating → depressed
⑤ disappointed → overjoyed
36. Macon에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Imagine the Titanic floating overhead: That’s what it
would have been like to see the USS Macon fly by. Nearly
800 feet long, the airship was completed in 1933 as part of
an effort to equip the U.S. Navy with airborne military bases.
With an onboard hangar, Macon was capable of launching
five small fixed-wing planes in midair. But it never saw
action and went down off California’s Big Sur coast during
a storm in 1935. Rediscovered in 1980 when a fisherman
caught a piece of the airship’s debris in his net, the wreck
was recently surveyed and mapped using sonar and remotely
operated robots. Government archaeologists continue to
explore the unique site, which lies in 1,500 feet of water.
* hangar: 격납고
① 1933년에 만들기 시작한 군사 기지였다.
② 해상에서 대형 비행기들을 발진시킬 수 있었다.
③ 1935년 작전 수행 중 폭풍으로 인하여 귀환하였다.
④ 잔해가 어부의 그물에 걸려서 발견되었다.
⑤ 고고학자들에 의해 탐색이 완료되었다.
37. Warren McArthur에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Warren McArthur graduated from Cornell in 1908 with a
degree in mechanical engineering. He began working in the
budding field of industrial design ― patenting ten lamps
between 1911 and 1914. He moved to Arizona in 1913,
where he and his brother opened car dealerships. Warren
originally ventured into furniture design and construction as
a hobby, but at age 44, he moved to Los Angeles to design
and manufacture metal furniture. He was among the
pioneers in the use of aluminum for furniture, and his
contribution included improvements and patents to facilitate
mass production. He relocated his factory back East to New
York in 1933 where he designed and manufactured unique
aluminum furniture.
① Cornell에서 기계공학 학위를 취득했다.
② 1911년부터 1914년 사이에 램프에 대한 특허를 받았다.
③ Arizona에서 친구들과 함께 자동차 정비소를 열었다.
④ 가구 디자인을 처음에는 취미로 했었다.
⑤ New York에서 알루미늄 가구를 제작했다.
38. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the trends of snow sports participation
in the four winter seasons from 2006/2007 to 2009/2010 in
the U.S. ① Alpine skiing had the most participants and
snowboarding had the second most across all four winter
seasons. ② Freestyle skiing, however, had the least participants
in each of the four seasons. ③ Over the four winter seasons,
a steady increase was seen in the number of participants in
both snowboarding and cross country skiing. ④ Compared to
the previous season, the number of participants in both alpine
skiing and freestyle skiing decreased in the 2007/2008 season.
⑤ The combined number of participants in snowboarding and
cross country skiing in the 2009/2010 season was smaller than
the number of participants in alpine skiing in the same season.
[39～40] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. Restoration assumes that one can recreate an artist’s
original intent and product. At best, restorers’ and museum
directors’ aesthetic preferences and historical theories drive
restorations, for it is impossible to step outside one’s historical
context. How can restorers be so sure that removing a layer
of lacquer isn’t merely their subconscious attempt to refashion
an artwork according to contemporary tastes? What’s
“restorative” about that? The “restored” Sistine Chapel may
look “authentic” today, but will it still look so when aesthetic
and historical theories have changed? Surely the best approach
with any great work of art is to simply leave it alone.
* lacquer: 래커(도료의 일종), 칠
① Do We Really Need Restoration?
② Aesthetics Matters in Restoration?
③ History of Successful Restoration
④ Restorers: A New Type of Artist
⑤ Sistine Chapel: Restored vs. Authentic
40. Your culture maintains an implicit “schedule” for the right
time to do many important things; for example, the right time
to start dating, to finish college, to buy your own home, or
to have a child. This unspoken timetable provides you with
a social clock, a schedule that tells you if you’re keeping
pace with your peers, are ahead of them, or are falling behind.
On the basis of this social clock, you evaluate your own social
and professional development. If you keep up with the rest
of your peers, then you’ll feel well adjusted, competent, and
a part of the group. If you’re late, you’ll probably experience
feelings of dissatisfaction. Although in some cultures the social
clock is becoming more flexible and more tolerant of deviations
from the conventional timetable, it still exerts pressure to keep
pace with your peers.
① Social Clock: An Unavoidable Pressure
② When Is the Right Time to Start Dating?
③ Time Management: A Matter of Concern for All
④ Flexibility and Tolerance of Today’s Social Clock
⑤ Why Is It Better to Keep Pace Than Fall Behind?
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
41. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Economic distance relates to the time and cost involved in
traveling from the origin to the destination area and back.
The higher the economic distance, the higher the resistance
for that destination and, consequently, the lower the demand.
① It follows, conversely, that between any origin and
destination point, if the travel time or travel cost can be
reduced, demand will increase. ② Many excellent examples
of this are available, such as the introduction of the jet plane
in 1959 and the introduction of the wide-bodied jets in the
late 1960s. ③ Jet planes first cut travel time between
California and Hawaii, for example, from twelve hours to
five hours, and demand grew dramatically. ④ A similar
surge in demand was experienced with the introduction of
the wide-bodied planes for transatlantic flights. ⑤ The
agricultural products picked up from Hawaiian farms in the
morning were on dinner tables in Californian homes by
evening. The introduction of these planes cut the travel cost
by almost 50 percent between the United States and most
countries on the European continent.
[42～43] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
42. A former resident of Canton, Ohio, was trying to
describe her image of the city to her classmates. She
found they had no image of this mid-sized city. She
described Canton as a city with major manufacturing
facilities and a downtown revitalization program.
(A) That fact suddenly crystallized the concept of Canton.
If Canton is destroyed, the nation might fall. That’s an
image that gave meaning and fullness to what it meant
to live in Canton.
(B) Her explanation moved the city from the position of no
image to that of a negative image. The class concluded
that Canton is a typical, boring, industrialized city.
(C) Then she suddenly recalled an experience: “I remember
hearing from a teacher that during World War II Canton
was a major U.S. target of the Germans.” Imagine, right
after the cities of Chicago, New York, and Los Angeles,
appears the name of Canton.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
43. Studying history is not about memorizing what we
have been told ― it requires us to investigate the
past. Like a detective, we start with the easy, known
pieces of information.
(A) You have to go further to ask questions such as, “Why
was he cruel?” and “What were the results of his rule?”
Hence, studying history trains us not to accept everything
we read or hear as the truth. Instead, it trains us to use our
critical thinking skills to get the full picture of the past.
(B) For example, if someone told you that Chinese Emperor
Qin Shihuang was a cruel ruler, would you simply accept
this as the truth? Or, would you ask questions about the
statement and look for information or evidence to support it?
(C) We then shuffle the pieces around to see how they fit
together. Once all the pieces fit, we have the full picture.
As we put the pieces together, we challenge ourselves
to think of other ways to describe what we know.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
44. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
While there are many places where this traditional view
of a scientist still holds true, labs aren’t the only place
where science is at work.
When you hear the word science, what’s the first thing that
comes to mind? It’s probably an image of a laboratory filled
with glassware and sophisticated equipment. ( ① ) The
person doing the science is wearing a white lab coat and
probably looks rather serious while engaged in some type of
experiment. ( ② ) Science can also be found at a construction
site, on a basketball court, and at a concert. ( ③ ) The truth
is that science is happening all around us. ( ④ ) It’s at work
in the kitchen when cooking meals, and we can even use it
when painting pictures. ( ⑤ ) Architects use science when
designing buildings, and science also explains why your
favorite baseball player can hit a home run.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many of us believe that amnesia, or sudden memory
loss, results in the inability to recall one’s name and
identity. This belief may reflect the way amnesia is
usually portrayed in movies, television, and literature. For
example, when we meet Matt Damon’s character in the
movie The Bourne Identity, we learn that he has no
memory for who he is, why he has the skills he does, or
where he is from. He spends much of the movie trying
to answer these questions. However, the inability to
remember your name and identity is exceedingly rare in
reality. Amnesia most often results from a brain injury
that leaves the victim unable to form new memories, but
with most memories of the past intact.
󰀻
While media often depict amnesia as a failure to (A)
past memories, especially one’s identity, most cases of
amnesia actually leave the sufferers unable to (B)
new memories with most memories of the past undamaged.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① integrate …… construct ② integrate …… rearrange
③ retrieve …… dismiss ④ retrieve …… construct
⑤ conceal …… rearrange
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 외국어(영어) 영역
8
8
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
[46～47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Our romantic mistakes can always be undone these days,
which you would think is a good thing. But the very
reversibility of our romantic commitments has only
worsened our problem because that also undermines our
satisfaction with our choices. To see this, you only need to
look at a study of a group of college students in a
photography class. The students made a print of their two
best photographs. They were then told that they could choose
one of the photos but that the other would be kept on file
as an example of their work. Then, the teacher added a twist.
One group was told that their choice was final. Whatever
they chose, they could not change their minds later. The other
group was told that they could switch photographs if they
changed their minds. In a survey taken later, students who
were allowed to change their mind liked their photos less
than the other students.
Why this paradoxical result? According to one researcher,
the brain has a kind of built-in defense system that works
to make us choices that cannot be undone.
Despite thinking that we would like the freedom to change
our minds, it appears that we are happier with our choices
if we think they can’t be changed, which means we would
be better off if we made romantic commitments more
permanent and more difficult to break, rather than less.
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Freedom of Choice: Everyone’s Unfulfilled Dream
② When Do We Need Permanent Relationships Most?
③ Happier When We Are Free to Change Our Minds?
④ Why Do People Regret Their Romantic Commitments?
⑤ A New Trend: Changing One’s Romantic Commitments
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① satisfied with ② spoiled by ③ unsure of
④ indifferent to ⑤ cautious of
[48～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Maureen Ferris was my best friend and I sometimes
visited her house after school. Her mother was stern and
meticulous about house cleaning. My mother, on the other
hand, did not care as much about a messy house. She had
sauce stains on her apron and sometimes allowed the
laundry to pile up. In the midst of her chores, my mother
spent time reading. This was her time away from endless
hours of child care and housework. Unironed school blouses
and a dirty kitchen might make (a) her feel guilty, but her
reading never did.
(B)
I carried over the love of reading to my workplace as
well. Off I’d go to work each day, passing on the gift of
reading to my students. I’d watch as they discovered they
could read and make sense of the letters and the words on
a page. All over the world there was agreement that this was
important, as important as eating or thinking or working.
And then one day, I finally understood what (b) she had
tried to show us, that reading was housework of the very
best kind.
(C)
One day, as I played in Maureen’s clean house, her mom
fixed me with (c) her cool gray eyes and said, “Your
mother’s nice, but she reads too much.” I was stunned. The
next time I caught my mother reading in her little patch of
sunlight, I studied (d) her in the doorway and decided her
apron could use a washing. Shame flushed through me.
Reading was the cause ― pleasure-reading in broad daylight.
Silently, I made vows that would keep me from sharing my
mother’s fate.
(D)
I tried my best not to follow in (e) her footsteps, but I
didn’t know that it was already too late for me. The way
I treasured my books revealed the extent of how much I
was already like my mother. The years passed in a blur of
covertly turned pages until I was a grown-up schoolteacher
with a husband and children of my own. I struggled
mightily with my own desire to open a novel in brazen
daylight. My only guiltless reading occurred at night, when
the dishes were rattling in the dishwasher and the kids
were in bed.
48. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (C) － (D) ② (B) － (D) － (C)
③ (C) － (B) － (D) ④ (C) － (D) － (B)
⑤ (D) － (B) － (C)
49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
50. 주어진 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 어머니의 앞치마에는 소스 얼룩이 묻어 있었다.
② 독서가 최고의 집안일이라는 것을 깨달았다.
③ 어머니에 대해 부끄러움을 느낀 적이 있었다.
④ 성장해서 학교 선생님이 되었다.
⑤ 죄책감 없이 독서할 수 있는 시간은 낮이었다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
1
8
2013학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 화분을 고르시오.
① ② ③
④ ⑤
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [1점]
① proud ② relaxed ③ angry
④ jealous ⑤ satisfied
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 이름이 첫인상에 미치는 영향
② 청중의 이름을 쉽게 기억하는 요령
③ 좋은 연설을 많이 들어야 하는 이유
④ 흥미 있는 연설 주제 선택의 중요성
⑤ 청중의 이름을 언급하는 효과적인 연설법
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 학교 콘서트 일정 조정하기
② 공공도서관 자원봉사 함께하기
③ 학교 축제 때 피아노 반주하기
④ 강사에게 레슨 가능 여부 알아보기
⑤ 피아노 연주 기법 동영상 찾아보기
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
① $ 27 ② $ 36 ③ $ 40 ④ $ 45 ⑤ $ 54
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 벼룩시장 판매자 등록을 홍보하려고
② 벼룩시장 개장 시간 변경을 공지하려고
③ 불우 이웃을 위한 성금 기부를 장려하려고
④ 중고품 재활용의 필요성을 강조하려고
⑤ 시내 관광 명소들을 소개하려고
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to prepare dinner for him
② to buy a new washing machine
③ to drop the children off at school
④ to call the customer service center
⑤ to do the laundry at her parents’ house
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
① 약국 ② 실험실 ③ 보건실
④ 편의점 ⑤ 응급실
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 코치 - 운동선수 ② 구급 대원 - 응급 환자
③ 상담 교사 - 학부모 ④ 경기장 안내원 - 관람객
⑤ 운동 용품 판매원 - 고객
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 인터넷에서 정보 찾기 ② 여행 안내서 사러 가기
③ 호텔에 예약 확인하기 ④ 친구들에게 의견 묻기
⑤ 지역 정보 책자 발간하기
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 모델을
고르시오.
12. Lovely Cover에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① 시에서 가장 인기 있는 독서 클럽이다.
② 30개의 그룹으로 나눠진다.
③ 한 달에 두 번 회원 집에서 모인다.
④ 때때로 유명한 작가들을 토론에 초대한다.
⑤ 헌 책을 병원에 기부하는 행사를 개최한다.
제 3 교시
홀수형
①
②
③
④
⑤
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
2
8
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오. [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Trust me. Your brother will love the hat.
② It’s important to keep yourself warm in Africa.
③ It’s not that difficult. I can teach you how to do it.
④ I hope I can travel to Africa to meet the child soon.
⑤ No problem. You’ll save money by joining the program.
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Then, how about meeting up after class?
② Well, can you redesign my blog by next Friday?
③ No. You may ruin your project if you don’t do it.
④ Of course! You can rent the DVD from the library.
⑤ Exactly! Everyone should have an equal opportunity.
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① So it is! Now I have enough time to finish it.
② That’s true! Good presentation skills are important.
③ That’s possible. I might be able to hand it in on Tuesday.
④ I agree. I need to get enough sleep to stay awake in class.
⑤ You can say that again! We should always do our best.
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ms. Anderson이 Brian에게 할 말로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Ms. Anderson:
① It’ll take time to make a new friend.
② You’d better tell me what happened last week.
③ You did the right thing by telling him the truth.
④ Why don’t you go and tell him that you’re sorry?
⑤ Don’t you know a friend in need is a friend indeed?
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지
의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
As you are well aware, a great tragedy took place in
our city last week. Some faulty electrical wiring led to a
fire breaking out and eventually destroying an entire
block of homes in the suburbs. From the very beginning
it was fanned by strong winds, but it would not have
spread so far and so quickly, if our firefighters had been
able to arrive at the scene in time. Our city has only one
fire station located downtown. Would you please establish
a new fire station in our area, since you are mayor of
our city? We are in urgent need of one. I look forward
to your response.
① 소방서 신설을 건의하려고
② 강풍 대비 훈련을 통보하려고
③ 전기 시설의 교체를 촉구하려고
④ 소방 시설의 현대화를 제안하려고
⑤ 소방관의 조속한 파견을 요청하려고
19. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Ellen Langer learned from her mother how to prepare a
roast. As a little girl, ① she would watch as her mother
cut off a small bit from one end of the meat before
placing it in the roasting pan. As an adult, ② she followed
the same routine. However, a question occurred to ③ her
one day. Why did she have to cut off the end of the
roast? She asked her mother, who just said she’d learned
to do it from her own mother. Then Langer asked her
grandmother. She explained that when she was a young
mother, the only roasting pan ④ she’d had was too short
for a standard roast, so she had to cut off the end to fit
it into the pan. She’d long since gotten roasting pans in
larger sizes and hadn’t cut an end off since. Yet for
years both Langer and ⑤ her mother had mindlessly
followed this routine.
20. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
In many countries, amongst younger people, the habit of
reading newspapers has been on the decline and some of
the dollars previously (A) spent / were spent on newspaper
advertising have migrated to the Internet. Of course some
of this decline in newspaper reading has been due to the
fact that we are doing more of our newspaper reading
online. We can read the news of the day, or the latest on
business, entertainment or (B) however / whatever news on
the websites of the New York Times, the Guardian or almost
any other major newspaper in the world. Increasingly, we
can access these stories wirelessly by mobile devices as
well as our computers. Advertising dollars have simply
been (C) followed / following the migration trail across to
these new technologies.
(A) (B) (C)
① spent …… however …… followed
② spent …… whatever …… following
③ were spent …… however …… following
④ were spent …… whatever …… followed
⑤ were spent …… whatever …… following
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
We take it for granted that film directors are in the
game of recycling. Adapting novels ① is one of the most
respectable of movie projects, while a book that calls
itself the novelization of a film is considered barbarous.
Being a hybrid art as well as a late one, film has always
been in a dialogue with ② other narrative genres. Movies
were first seen as an exceptionally potent kind of illusionist
theatre, the rectangle of the screen corresponding to the
proscenium of a stage, ③ which appear actors. Starting in
the early silent period, plays were regularly “turned into”
films. But ④ filming plays did not encourage the evolution
of what truly was distinctive about a movie: the intervention
of the camera ― its mobility of vision. As a source of plot,
character, and dialogue, the novel seemed more ⑤ suitable.
Many early successes of cinema were adaptations of
popular novels.
* proscenium: 앞 무대
22. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I watched the beautiful stretch of the shoreline as it
floated into view. How wonderful it was! After two days
at sea, I finally saw the land of infinite opportunities.
There it was before me ― smiling and inviting; it was
difficult for anyone to decline that invitation. I was full
of great plans to find success in this unknown land. I
had accepted a job offer from Dr. Gilbert, who had
opened a medical clinic at an inland village last year. It
gave me great pleasure to think about how my dream
would become a reality. I looked again at the coast. The
line of distant mountains and shapes of houses were
gradually emerging through the mist. They welcomed me
with endless promises.
① excited and hopeful ② sad and depressed
③ relieved and sympathetic ④ scared and frightened
⑤ ashamed and embarrassed
[23~27] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
23. To say that we need to curb anger and our negative
thoughts and emotions does not mean that we should deny
our feelings. There is an important distinction to be made
between denial and restraint. The latter constitutes a
deliberate and voluntarily adopted discipline based on an
appreciation of the benefits of doing so. This is very
different from the case of someone who suppresses
emotions such as anger out of a feeling that they need to
present a facade of self-control, or out of fear of what
others may think. Such behaviour is like closing a wound
which is still infected. We are not talking about
rule-following. Where denial and suppression occur, there
comes the danger that in doing so the individual
anger and resentment. The trouble here is
that at some future point they may find they cannot
contain these feelings any longer.
* facade: 표면, 겉
① fades out ② copes with ③ stores up
④ soothes ⑤ overestimates
24. Have you ever heard anyone say of a dog, “Well, he’s
very successful and lives in a beautiful house, but he’s
not very happy”? One reason most dogs are much happier
than most people is that dogs aren’t affected by external
circumstances the way we are. I notice that even when it’s
pouring rain outside, my dogs, Blue and Celeste, are still
excited to go for a walk. As soon as I open the front door
to look outside, they’re beside me in a flash, standing
expectantly, ready for an adventure. I usually wait for a
break in the downpour, and then we all dash out together.
The fact that the ground is wet and there are mud
puddles dotting the landscape .
While I’m carefully picking my way around the wet
spots, the dogs are joyfully splashing right through them.
They aren’t afraid to get their paws dirty.
① motivates us to take a shorter walk
② stirs great excitement in me
③ puts the dogs in trouble
④ means nothing to the dogs
⑤ makes me want to wander around
25. In Belding’s ground squirrels, males leave home and
females mature in their natal area. This male-biased dispersal
creates an imbalance in the way males and females are
related to those individuals around them ― females find
themselves surrounded by relatives, while males are generally
in areas with complete strangers. This asymmetry translates
into females who warn close kin by emitting alarm calls,
while males generally do not emit calls since their dispersal
from their natal areas means their blood kin typically do
not benefit from such a warning. Further support for the
kinship-based alarm-calling hypothesis includes Sherman’s
finding that in the rare instances when females do move
away from their natal groups and into groups with far fewer
relatives, they .
① end up acquiring the alarm calls of the new group
② make constant attempts to bring their blood kin along
③ display a tendency to become more active and cooperative
④ emit alarm calls less frequently than do native females
⑤ adopt a more elaborate defense mechanism than alarm
calls
26. By likening the eye to a camera, elementary biology
textbooks help to produce a misleading impression of
what perception entails. Only in terms of the physics of
image formation do the eye and camera have anything in
common. Both eye and camera have a lens that focuses
light rays from the outside world into an image, and both
have a means of adjusting the focus and brightness of
that image. Both eye and camera have a light-sensitive
layer onto which the image is cast (the retina and film,
respectively). However, image formation is only the first
step towards seeing.
obscure the much more fundamental difference between
the two, which is that the camera merely records an
image, whereas the visual system interprets it. [3점]
① Apparent differences in the focusing power of a lens
② Superficial analogies between the eye and a camera
③ Contrasts in light adaptation between the retina and
film
④ Misunderstandings of image formation in the eye and
a camera
⑤ Close relationships between image formation and
interpretation
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
4
8
27. Recent evidence suggests that the common ancestor of
Neanderthals and modern people, living about 400,000
years ago, may have already been using pretty sophisticated
language. If language is based on genes and is the key to
cultural evolution, and Neanderthals had language, then
why did the Neanderthal toolkit show so little cultural
change? Moreover, genes would undoubtedly have changed
during the human revolution after 200,000 years ago, but
more in response to new habits than as causes of them. At
an earlier date, cooking selected mutations for smaller guts
and mouths, rather than vice versa. At a later date, milk
drinking selected for mutations for retaining lactose digestion
into adulthood in people of western European and East
African descent. .
The appeal to a genetic change driving evolution gets
gene-culture co-evolution backwards: it is a top-down
explanation for a bottom-up process. [3점]
① Genetic evolution is the mother of new habits
② Every gene is the architect of its own mutation
③ The cultural horse comes before the genetic cart
④ The linguistic shovel paves the way for a cultural road
⑤ When the cultural cat is away, the genetic mice will play
[28~29] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
28. To describe what happens to common resources as a
result of human greed, Garrett Hardin used the example
of an area of pasture on which all the cattle-owners are
permitted to graze their animals free of charge. Each
cattle-owner seeks to (A) his gain and in doing so
considers the relative advantage and disadvantage of
adding one more animal to the herd. The advantage is
that the cattle-owner receives the whole of the profit
from the sale of the additional animal. The disadvantage
is that the extra grazing contributes to the deterioration of
the pasture. However, the disadvantage is shared among
all the cattle-owners using the pasture, so the individual
owner suffers only a fraction of the disadvantage.
Consequently, the advantage is bound to (B) the
disadvantage. Thus, it is inevitable that more and more
animals will be brought onto the pasture until overgrazing
totally destroys the pasture.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① maximize …… equal ② distribute …… diminish
③ maximize …… exceed ④ distribute …… outweigh
⑤ maximize …… minimize
29. In physics, scientists invent models, or theories, to
describe and predict the data we observe about the
universe. Newton’s theory of gravity is one example;
Einstein’s theory of gravity is another. Those theories,
though they describe the same phenomenon, constitute
very different versions of reality. Newton, (A) ,
imagined that masses affect each other by exerting a
force, while in Einstein’s theory the effects occur through
a bending of space and time and there is no concept of
gravity as a force. Either theory could be employed to
describe, with great accuracy, the falling of an apple, but
Newton’s would be much easier to use. (B) , for
the calculations necessary for the satellite-based global
positioning system (GPS) that helps you navigate while
driving, Newton’s theory would give the wrong answer,
and so Einstein’s must be used.
(A) (B)
① for example …… On the other hand
② for example …… As a result
③ therefore …… As a result
④ moreover …… Likewise
⑤ moreover …… On the other hand
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Researchers have suggested that maintaining good social
relations depends on two ① complementary processes:
being sensitive to the needs of others and being motivated
to make amends or pay compensation when a violation
does occur. In short, maintaining good social relations
depends on the ② capacity for guilt. Martin L. Hoffman,
who has focused on the guilt that comes from harming
others, suggests that the motivational basis for this guilt
is empathetic distress. Empathetic distress occurs when
people ③ deny that their actions have caused harm or
pain to another person. Motivated by feelings of guilt,
they are ④ inclined to make amends for their actions.
Making amends serves to repair damaged social relations
and ⑤ restore group harmony.
31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
Anxiety has a damaging effect on mental performance of
all kinds. It is in one sense a useful response gone awry ―
an overly zealous mental preparation for an anticipated threat.
But such mental rehearsal is (A) disastrous / constructive
cognitive static when it becomes trapped in a stale routine
that captures attention, intruding on all other attempts to focus
elsewhere. Anxiety undermines the intellect. In a complex,
intellectually demanding and high-pressure task such as that
of air traffic controllers, for example, having chronically
high anxiety is an almost sure predictor that a person
will eventually fail in training or in the field. The anxious
are more likely to fail even given (B) inferior / superior
scores on intelligence tests, as a study of 1,790 students in
training for air traffic control posts discovered. Anxiety
also sabotages academic performance of all kinds: 126
different studies of more than 36,000 people found that the
more (C) prone / resistant to anxieties a person is, the
poorer his or her academic performance is.
* go awry: 빗나가다
(A) (B) (C)
① disastrous …… inferior …… prone
② disastrous …… superior …… prone
③ disastrous …… superior …… resistant
④ constructive …… inferior …… resistant
⑤ constructive …… superior …… resistant
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 5
5
8
32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은?
The above graph shows the total number of researchers
and the number of researchers per 1,000 people in the
EAP (economically active population) of Korea from 1997
to 2007. ① Compared to the previous year, both numbers
recorded each year showed an increase except for the
numbers recorded in 1998. ② The highest annual growth
in the number of researchers per 1,000 people in the EAP
was recorded between 2000 and 2001. ③ From 2004 to
2007 Korea had more than 200,000 researchers each year,
recording the largest number in 2007. ④ The number of
researchers per 1,000 people in the EAP in 2007 was
twice as large as that in 1999. ⑤ The annual increase in
the total number of researchers was the largest between
1998 and 1999.
33. Gregorio Dati에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Gregorio Dati was a successful merchant of Florence,
who entered into many profitable partnerships dealing in
wool, silk, and other merchandise. His career, however,
especially early on, knew the vicissitudes characteristic of
Renaissance business. For example, while he was en
route to Spain as his enterprise’s traveling partner, a role
typical for young men, pirates robbed him of all his
goods, including a consignment of pearls, and of his own
clothes. His recovery from such losses followed in part
from four successive marriages. Later in life, he was
honored to serve a number of posts in the city
government. Over the years he wrote a “diary,” actually
an occasional record in which he kept accounts of his
commercial and family life. Men of his kind pioneered
this form of writing about the public and private self.
* vicissitudes: 파란만장
** consignment: 위탁판매품
① Florence 상인으로서 성공하지 못했다.
② Spain으로 가는 길에 자신의 옷을 제외한 모든 것을 약탈
당했다.
③ 네 번의 잇따른 결혼으로 경제적 손실을 입었다.
④ 인생 후반에 시 정부에서 다수의 직책을 맡았다.
⑤ 자신의 가족생활을 매일 기록한 일기를 썼다.
34. Great Salt Lake에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
The Great Salt Lake is the largest salt lake in the
Western Hemisphere. The lake is fed by the Bear, Weber,
and Jordan rivers and has no outlet. At the close of the
Ice Age the entire region was submerged beneath a lake
of meltwater, and overflow from the lake flowed into the
Pacific Ocean through the Snake and Columbia rivers. The
great climatic change the lake underwent and continued
evaporation, exceeding the inflow of fresh water, reduced
the lake to one-twentieth of its former size. The majority
of salt in the Great Salt Lake is a remnant of dissolved
salts that are present in all fresh water. As the water
evaporated, the traces of dissolved salts were gradually
concentrated in the shrinking lake.
① 서반구에서 가장 큰 소금호수이다.
② Bear 강, Weber 강, Jordan 강에서 물이 유입된다.
③ 전 지역이 물에 잠긴 적이 있다.
④ 심한 기후 변화와 계속된 증발로 크기가 줄었다.
⑤ 대부분의 소금은 바닷물이 증발하여 남은 것이다.
[35~36] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
35. Although praise may encourage children to continue an
activity while an adult is watching, according to recent
studies, they are less likely to continue the activity when
the adult leaves or to repeat the activity in the future.
Rather than increasing children’s commitment to positive
behavior, praise encourages children to find ways to get
future verbal “goodies” from important adults. In other
words, praise is like the large pink icing rose in the center
of a cake. It is appealing and at first bite its sweetness
tastes wonderful. A couple more bites still might taste
good, but it quickly becomes overly sweet. It has only
one simple flavor; we soon tire of it and if we eat very
much at any one time, we might even feel slightly ill. It
may provide some quick energy but it provides no
nourishment and doesn’t support growth or health.
① 칭찬은 어린이에게 장기적으로는 효과가 없을 수 있다.
② 칭찬받는 어린이는 정신적으로 건강하게 성장한다.
③ 칭찬은 어린이의 바람직한 행동을 유발할 수 있다.
④ 어린이를 칭찬할 때는 달콤한 언어를 삼가야 한다.
⑤ 어린이를 칭찬하는 어른은 일관성을 유지해야 한다.
36. What’s dangerous about the Internet is, because it has
the aura of technology around it, it has a totally
undeserved instant credibility. The fact that information is
conveyed in this high-tech manner somehow adds
authority to what is conveyed, when in fact the Internet is
a global conveyer of unfiltered, unedited, untreated
information. It is the greatest tool we have not only for
making people smarter quicker, but also for making people
dumber faster. Rumors published on the Internet now have
a way of immediately becoming facts. This is particularly
true among people who might not themselves have access
to the Internet but hear a piece of news or gossip from
the people around them who do have access.
① 신속한 정보 보급을 위해 인터넷 접근성의 개선이 요구된다.
② 인터넷은 근거 없는 소문을 유포하여 사회 불안을 조장한다.
③ 인터넷은 다양한 정보를 빠르게 제공하는 훌륭한 도구이다.
④ 인터넷은 지적 능력의 향상과 저하를 동시에 가져온다.
⑤ 인터넷은 검증되지 않은 정보를 사실처럼 믿게 만든다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
6
8
[37~38] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
37. Why is it difficult to find a runner who competes
equally well in both 100-m and 10,000-m races? The
primary reason is that our muscles contain two main
types of muscle fibers, called slow and fast muscle fibers.
Slow muscle fibers are muscle cells that can sustain
repeated contractions but don’t generate a lot of quick
power for the body. They perform better in endurance
exercises, like long-distance running, which require slow,
steady muscle activity. Fast muscle fibers are cells that
can contract more quickly and powerfully than slow
muscle fibers but fatigue much more easily; they function
best for short bursts of intense activity, like weight lifting
or sprinting.
① reasons for runners to develop strong muscles
② differences between slow and fast muscle fibers
③ comparison of sprinting with long-distance running
④ necessity of building muscles for long-distance runners
⑤ relationship between muscle fibers and physical fatigue
38. Scientists should be careful to reduce bias in their
experiments. A bias occurs when what the scientist expects
changes how the results are viewed. This expectation might
cause a scientist to select a result from one trial over those
from other trials. Scientists can lessen bias by running as
many trials as possible and by keeping accurate notes of
each observation made. Valid experiments also must have
data that are measurable. This allows others to compare
the results to data they obtain from a similar experiment.
Most importantly, the experiment must be repeatable.
Findings are supportable when other scientists perform the
same experiment and get the same results.
① necessary conditions of repeatable experiments
② importance of identifying bias in scientific research
③ requirements for objective scientific experiments
④ guidelines for collecting measurable data in experiments
⑤ effective strategies for keeping accurate notes on data
[39~40] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
39. I once heard a woman say, “Of course, he’s successful.
It’s in his genes.” I knew she wasn’t talking about me,
because I was wearing shorts. I also knew she was wrong.
Success is not in our genes. Not all children of successful
people become successful themselves. Many kids have
everything going for them and end up total disasters. They
do none of the things that helped their parents succeed.
The number of unsuccessful people who come from
successful parents is proof that genes have nothing to do
with success. You can’t change your genes, but you can
change the people you imitate. The choice is up to you,
so why not imitate the best? There are hundreds of great
people to imitate and copy. They have terrific advice about
what helped them succeed. Jot down notes and carry
them around in your pants pocket. Then success will be
in your jeans, even if it’s not in your genes.
① Like Father, Like Son
② Want Success? Take a Recess!
③ The Myth of the Self-Made Man Is No More
④ Stick to Your Genes and Excel!
⑤ Follow the Best and Succeed!
40. In the early 1990s Norway introduced a carbon tax on
emissions from energy, and it did seem to encourage
environmental innovation. However, unexpected circumstances
came when they tried to apply this approach globally.
Agreeing on international taxes on emissions was
notoriously hard, as we already know that the European
Union has experienced terrible difficulties in trying to
regularize the complex and myriad differences in its
members’ sales taxes. Besides, although Sweden, Finland,
and Denmark barely decided to introduce carbon taxes
during the 1990s, they have not harmonized their
approaches with Norway or with each other. If such
similar countries can’t come to an agreement, there is
little hope for doing so with the vastly more diverse
countries in the rest of the world.
① Reduce Carbon Emission, Rescue Earth
② No Exit Out of Fatal Carbon Emissions
③ Global Carbon Tax: A Long Way to Go
④ Carbon Emissions: Not in My Backyard
⑤ Everlasting Conflict: Taxpayers vs. Collectors
41. 다음 글에서 전체의 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Apologies often fail. One reason apologies fail is that
the “offender” and the “victim” usually see the event
differently. Examining personal narratives, researchers
have found that those who cause harm tend to minimize
the offense ― probably to protect themselves from shame
and guilt. They also tend to downplay the consequences of
their actions. ① These tendencies can inflame the anger
of the hurt person, who, in contrast, may see an offense
as bigger than it really is. ② When sincere apologies are
offered in an ordinary human relationship, they are
readily accepted by the victims and reconciliations ensue.
③ Those who are hurt tend to see the act as one with
severe consequences and as part of an ongoing pattern
that is inexcusable and immoral. ④ Each person has his
or her own truth, and there is distortion on both sides.
⑤ Therefore, to apologize sincerely we must first listen
attentively to how the other person really feels about
what happened ― not simply assert what we think
happened.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 외국어(영어) 영역 7
7
8
42. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
When you walk into a store, you are besieged by
information. Even purchases that seem simple can
quickly turn into a cognitive quagmire. Look at the jam
aisle.
(A) Rational models of decision-making suggest that the
way to find the best product is to take all of this
information into account and to carefully analyze the
different brands on display. But this method can
backfire.
(B) A glance at the shelves can inspire a whole range of
questions. Should you buy the smooth-textured
strawberry jam or the one with less sugar? Does the
more expensive jam taste better?
(C) When we spend too much time thinking in the
supermarket, we can trick ourselves into choosing the
wrong things for the wrong reasons. Making better
decisions when picking out jams or bottles of wine is
best done with the emotional brain, which generates its
verdict automatically.
* quagmire: 수렁, 진창
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
[43~44] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
43.
But now rock radio is in seemingly terminal decline and
MTV doesn’t show many music videos anymore.
Once upon a time, there was only one way to launch a
hit album: radio. Nothing else reached as many people, as
often. Getting on a radio playlist was difficult, but once
a song was in heavy rotation on the radio, it had a high
probability of selling. Then, in the 1980s, came MTV,
which became the second way to create a hit. ( ① ) It
had even more limited capacity for new music, but its
influence over a generation was unparalleled. ( ② ) For
the music labels, those were good times; it was a brutally
competitive business, but it was a business they knew.
( ③ ) They understood the rules, and they could earn
their keep by working them. ( ④ ) So how to market
music? ( ⑤ ) Labels know the answer lies online,
tapping the word-of-mouth forces that are replacing
traditional marketing in creating demand, but they’re still
trying to figure out exactly how best to do it.
* label: 음반사
44.
Despite such evidence of favoritism toward handsome
politicians, follow-up research demonstrated that voters
did not realize their bias.
Research has shown that we automatically assign to
good-looking individuals such favorable traits as talent,
kindness, honesty, and intelligence. ( ① ) Furthermore,
we make these judgements without being aware that
physical attractiveness plays a role in the process. ( ② )
Some consequences of this unconscious assumption that
“good-looking equals good” scare me. ( ③ ) For
example, a study of the 1974 Canadian federal elections
found that attractive candidates received more than two
and a half times as many votes as unattractive candidates.
( ④ ) In fact, 73 percent of Canadian voters surveyed
denied in the strongest possible terms that their votes had
been influenced by physical appearance; only 14 percent
even allowed for the possibility of such influence. ( ⑤ )
Voters can deny the impact of attractiveness on
electability all they want, but evidence has continued to
confirm its troubling presence.
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
“Why, in country after country that mandated seat
belts, was it impossible to see the promised reduction in
road accident fatalities?” John Adams, professor of
geography at University College London, wrote in one
of his many essays on risk. “It appears that measures
that protect drivers from the consequences of bad
driving encourage bad driving. The principal effect of
seat belt legislation has been a shift in the burden of
risk from those already best protected in cars, to the
most vulnerable, pedestrians and cyclists, outside cars.”
Adams started to group these counterintuitive findings
under the concept of risk compensation, the idea that
humans have an inborn tolerance for risk. As safety
features are added to vehicles and roads, drivers feel
less vulnerable and tend to take more chances. The
phenomenon can be observed in all aspects of our daily
lives. Children who wear protective gear during their
games have a tendency to take more physical risks.
Hikers take more risks when they think a rescuer can
access them easily.
󰀻
According to John Adams, the phenomenon that safety
measures (A) careless driving may be accounted
for by the notion that a greater sense of security
(B) people to take more risks.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① contribute to …… tempts ② contribute to …… forbids
③ discourage …… tempts ④ discourage …… forces
⑤ discourage …… forbids
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
8
8
[46~47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
What should writers do when they’re teased by
intriguing but elusive ideas, by hints of thoughts that
seem too vague to be expressed in words? Edgar Allan
Poe’s advice is simple: They should pick up their pens
(or, he might add today, power up their laptops). Poe
dismisses the argument that any ideas are so deep or
subtle that they’re “ .”
“For my own part,” he said in an 1846 article in
Graham’s Magazine, “I have never had a thought which
I could not set down in words, with even more
distinctness than that with which I conceived it.” The
“mere act” of writing, Poe believed, helps writers make
their ideas not only clearer but more logical. To use his
phrase, the process of writing contributes to “the
logicalization of thought.”
Whenever he felt dissatisfied with a vague “conception
of the brain,” Poe said, “I resort forthwith to the pen,
for the purpose of obtaining, through its aid, the
necessary form, consequence and precision.”
Today’s advocates of freewriting would probably agree
with Poe on this point. Sometimes, the best way to
resolve a dilemma ― whether it’s a writing dilemma or
a thinking dilemma ― is simply to start writing.
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Begin at the End
② Think with Your Pen
③ Pleasure of Freewriting
④ Ideas Too Vague to Be Real
⑤ Make It Clear, Make It Logical
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① incapable of drawing attention
② in danger of being empty
③ against the writer’s will
④ beyond the compass of words
⑤ appreciated only by a privileged few
[48~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
On May 29th there was a heavy rain but the sun came
out the next day. Driving back from the village, I stopped
the car because a small woodchuck was traveling
along the road, its belly almost flat to the gravel. I got
out, took off my sweater, threw it over the woodchuck and
wrapped him in it, then put him on the floor of the car
while I drove home. I guessed the rain had washed out his
burrow. If I hadn’t come along (a) he would have eventually
died of starvation. Rescuing him, I felt as large as Fate.
* woodchuck: 마멋(다람쥣과의 짐승)
(B)
Very shortly the carton seemed too small. I offered
him a nest made of a covered box, bedded with straw
and with a round doorway cut in the front. He knew
instantly that a hole spells home, and (b) he dashed
inside. Every time I came to feed him, he jumped into
my lap as eagerly as ever. As the months passed, the
chuck grew bigger and bigger. My husband remarked
that if I didn’t do something soon, I would be chased
around for the rest of my days by a 15-pound
woodchuck begging for milk.
(C)
At home I put him in the bathtub and my husband
found a large carton. (c) He put cat litter in the bottom
and straw on top of that. When I put the chuck in, he
gratefully burrowed into the straw. I made a mixture of
milk and baby cereal for him. When I gave it to the
chuck, he ate it greedily. (d) He accepted me quickly. If
I put my hand in the carton, he nibbled my fingers. It
became clear that I was imprinting the woodchuck and
vice versa.
* imprint: 강하게 인상지우다
(D)
I decided to put him in a new burrow. I found a hole
along the wall of our orchard, put the chuck near it and
left him. I continued to visit him with his milk. Each
time (e) he greeted me joyfully, drank greedily, and tried
persistently to follow me back into the house. The
parting came unexpectedly. I went away on a brief trip.
When I came back, I saw no sign of him. In the spring
when I see a large, handsome woodchuck playing on
the grass, I will hope that it is he.
48. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
50. 주어진 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 운전 중 마멋을 발견하고 차를 세웠다.
② 스웨터를 벗어 마멋을 감쌌다.
③ 마멋에게 둥근 출입구가 있는 둥지를 마련해 주었다.
④ 우유와 유아용 시리얼의 혼합물을 만들었다.
⑤ 여행에서 돌아온 직후에 마멋을 다시 볼 수 있었다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1 8
번부터 번까지는 1 22 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 20
번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 들
려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① You didn’t look nervous at all.
② I’m sorry you missed the concert.
③ I’d like to go to the concert with you.
④ I got an urgent call from my company.
⑤ I didn’t know your concert was yesterday.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
①　I’m going to water the plants.
②　I’ll go get some empty boxes.
③　I’ll order soil for the planting.
④　Carrots and lettuce would be nice.
⑤ Children need to eat more vegetables.
3. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I tried to, but my cell phone was dead.　
② Why didn’t you take the subway instead?
③ That’s terrible. Are the passengers all safe?
④ Don’t worry. The next train will come soon.
⑤ I was lucky to catch the train at the last minute.
4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 역사 학습용 게임을 홍보하려고
② 강의의 개요와 목적을 설명하려고
③ 시험 준비 요령에 관해 조언하려고
④ 역사 유적 탐방 프로그램을 소개하려고
⑤ 온라인 게임의 역사 왜곡에 대해 항의하려고
5. 대화를 듣고, 교내 영어 대회에 대한 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
① 실시 분야를 늘려야 한다.
② 개최 시기를 늦춰야 한다.
③ 학년별로 나누어 실시해야 한다.
④ 심사 기준을 미리 공개해야 한다.
⑤ 학생을 심사 위원에 포함시켜야 한다.
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 대나무의 다양한 용도
② 판다의 수가 줄어드는 원인
③ 무분별한 삼림 개발의 위험성
④ 영화가 판다의 이미지에 미친 영향
⑤ 대나무 숲이 휴식 공간으로 인기 있는 이유
7. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 기숙사 생활 예절
② 기숙사 생활의 단점
③ 기숙사비 인하의 필요성
④ 통학 시간을 절약하는 방법
⑤ 가족과 함께 하는 식사의 중요성
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 팬-체조 선수 ② 영화감독-배우
③ 강습생-수영 강사 ④ 리포터-구조 요원
⑤ 사진 기자-수영 선수
9. 대화를 듣고, 포스터 디자인에서 남자가 수정할 부분을 고르
시오.
⑤
①
②
③
④
May 12, 2013
8 P.M.
Orange Theater
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 학생 상담 센터 소개해 주기
② 안전 교육 자료 제작해 주기
③ 초등학교 소방 훈련 도와주기
④ 일일 교사 프로그램 참가하기
⑤ 소방서 견학 안내 책자 보내 주기
2013학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어영역(B형) 1
제 3 교시
영어영역(B형)
2
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
2 8
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to make a dinner reservation
② to go out to get some food for her
③ to proofread the presentation slides
④ to attend the seminar on behalf of her
⑤ to scan the photos for the presentation
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 야구 경기를 보러 갈 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 미술 과제를 끝내지 못해서
② 가족사진을 찾으러 가야 해서
③ 비디오카메라를 빌리러 가야 해서
④ 할머니 생신잔치 준비를 해야 해서
⑤ 야구 경기 관람권을 구하지 못해서
13. 대화를 듣고, Greenworld Scholarship에 관해 두 사람이 언급
하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 대상 학년 ② 신청 기한
③ 성적 요건 ④ 제출 서류
⑤ 수여 금액
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $ 6 ② $ 9 ③ $ 10 ④ $ 19 ⑤ $ 21
15. Young Inventors’ Camp에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 4월 첫째 주에 개최된다.
② 팀별로 발명품을 제작한다.
③ 우승팀은 국제 발명가 회의에 참석할 수 있다.
④ 유명 발명가의 초청 강연이 있다.
⑤ 전년도 참가자에게는 참가 우선권이 주어진다.
16. winged bean에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오. [3점]
① 덥고 습한 나라에서 잘 자란다.
② 거의 모든 부분을 먹을 수 있다.
③ 꽃을 익히면 시금치 맛이 난다.
④ 뿌리의 박테리아가 토양을 비옥하게 한다.
⑤ 단백질과 비타민의 공급원이다.
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 로봇 청소기를
고르시오.
Robot Vacuum Cleaners
Model Warranty Battery Duration Price
① Lingo 1 year 1 hour $ 300
② Lobo 1 year 2 hours $ 350
③ Tango 2 years 1 hour $ 400
④ Wizard 2 years 2 hours $ 450
⑤ Sweeper 3 years 2 hours $ 500
18. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① That’s good. I’d like to come at 5 p.m.
② I see. What time is he going to come back?
③ Is he? How about taking him to the dentist?
④ The dentist will see you now. You can go in.
⑤ Right. I should have brushed my teeth regularly.
19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I’m sorry. I failed the interview yesterday.
② I know. I learned a lot from the internship.
③ I didn’t get information about the internship.
④ Thanks for encouraging me. I’ll try my best.
⑤ I always wanted to join the school drama club.
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Emily가 점원에게 할 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
Emily:
① I already have a similar style.
② I’m looking for a dress like this.
③ I came to pick up the dress I ordered.
④ Will you come to the party next Saturday?
⑤ Can you show me another fashion magazine?
[21 ~ 22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① types of skintoskin
contact
② ways to raise a healthy baby
③ tips on how to breastfeed effectively
④ importance of early childhood education
⑤ influence of environment on intelligence
22. kangaroo care의 효과로 언급되지 않은 것은? [3점]
① 체중 증가 ② 숙면 유도
③ 체온 유지 ④ 면역 체계 강화
⑤ 심장 박동 안정
이제 듣기·말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는
문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
영어영역(B형)
3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
3 8
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
What would happen if you went to the soil and said, “Give
me some fruit. Give me some plants”? The soil would
probably respond, “Excuse me, sir, but you’re a little
confused. You must be new here. That’s not the way the
game is played.” Then it would explain that you should plant
the seed. You take care of it. You water it and cultivate the
soil. You fertilize it. You protect it and nurture it. Then, if
you do it well, you will get your plant or your fruit
sometime later. You could ask from the soil forever, but it
wouldn’t change things. You have to keep giving, keep
nurturing, for the soil to bear fruit ― and life is exactly the
same way.
① 분수에 맞게 처신하라.
② 행동하기 전에 상황을 고려하라.
③ 효율적인 작업 방식을 계속 모색하라.
④ 서로에게 도움이 되는 방법을 찾으라.
⑤ 원하는 것을 얻으려면 먼저 노력을 기울이라.
24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we furnish our rooms or fill our closets, we say “I
want that,” but we also tell manufacturers “make more of
that” ― setting in motion a whole process of extraction,
production, distribution, marketing, and sales. In the process,
we tell each other that this level of consumption is normal,
natural, and good. Each of our decisions, therefore, is a case
study in ethics, a determination about the nature of “the
good life.” As we peruse the stuff available to us, we’re
making judgements about which goods are good for us and
why. We don’t think we’re engaged in ethical reflection, but
we are deciding what we value, and how we will embody
our values in the material world. Our rooms and our
belongings send messages about identity and community, but
they also express our ethical sensibilities, whether we like it
or not.
① Where we live decides what we consume.
② What we buy reflects what we value in life.
③ Old things carry the memories of their owners.
④ Ethics rarely has an impact on consumer behavior.
⑤ Excessive spending goes against our ethical values.
25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
After witnessing an event, we are sometimes exposed to
new information that can actually change our memory. What
is known as the “postevent
information effect” often results
from our dialogues with other people. For example, an
eyewitness to some event frequently discusses with others
what they saw. In the aftermath of some event, the
eyewitness and others may speculate as to exactly what
happened, the sequence in which it occurred, and the degree
to which various participants were involved. Rather than
facilitating reproductive memory ― the accurate reproduction
of some past event, an eyewitness’ dialogues with other
people create reconstructive memory ― a reconstruction of
the past which may be quite inaccurate because it responds
more to considerations of plausibility than fact. Therefore,
people can reconstruct inaccurate memories after witnessing
some event as a result of discussing that event with other
people.
* plausibility: 그럴듯함, 있음직함
① How Distortion of Memory Can Occur
② Why We Need to Reconstruct Our Memory
③ Relationship Between Intelligence and Memory
④ Reproductive Memory: A Source of Inspiration
⑤ Dialogue: An Integral Part of Accurate Memory
26. 밑줄 친 he[him]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
John Boyle O’Reilly, poet, was one day walking along
Boylston street in Boston. A stranger who was approaching
① him from behind mistook him for a friend whom he had
not seen for a long time. He slapped O’Reilly on the
shoulder and greeted ② him heartily. Many men in O’Reilly’s
place would have been annoyed and shown it, but not so the
poet. Turning about, ③ he stretched out his hand. “I am not
Jack,” said ④ he, “but I am glad to shake hands with any
man who is as glad to see an old friend as you seem to
be.” This handsome speech was a great relief to the
stranger, who had been much embarrassed upon seeing an
unknown face turned toward ⑤ him.
영어영역(B형)
4
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
4 8
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
The ‘Merton Rule’ was devised in 2003 by Adrian Hewitt, a
local planning officer in Merton, southwest London. The rule,
which Hewitt created with a couple of colleagues and
persuaded the borough council to pass, ①was that any
development beyond a small scale would have to include the
capacity to generate ten percent of that building’s energy
requirements, or the developers would be denied permission
②to build. The rule sounded sensible and quickly caught on,
with over a hundred other local councils ③followed it within
a few years. In London, the mayor at the time, Ken
Livingstone, introduced ‘Merton Plus,’ which raised the bar to
twenty percent. The national government then introduced the
rule more ④widely. Adrian Hewitt became a celebrity in the
small world of local council planning, and Merton council
started winning awards for ⑤its environmental leadership.
*raise the bar: 기준을 높이다
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Sometimes athletes need to be allowed to practice their
skills on their own before they receive feedback. That way
they can determine what is working and what isn’t and can
become more ①mindful of their strengths and weaknesses. If
you attempt to provide assistance when athletes would prefer
to practice on their own, you may be ②wasting a lot of time
and breath. When athletes realize that their best efforts are
producing ③satisfactory outcomes, they are usually more
motivated to hear what you have to say. In other words,
athletes are responsive to assistance when they fail to achieve
the outcome they were hoping for. A coach’s challenge, then,
is to remain patient until these and other types of ④teachable
moments arise. The reward for such ⑤patience is athletes
who are motivated to hear what you have to say and eager to
incorporate your suggestions.
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows six Olympians who won the most
medals in the Summer Olympic Games. ①Michael Phelps of
the USA is now the most decorated Olympian of all time
with a total of 20 medals including 16 gold medals. ②Larisa
Latynina of the USSR takes up the second place winning just
two medals fewer than Phelps, but in terms of gold medals
she is seven medals behind him. ③After Latynina comes
Nikolay Andrianov of the USSR with a total of 15 medals,
two golds and one bronze fewer than Latynina. ④ Boris
Shakhlin of the USSR, Edoardo Mangiarotti of Italy and
Takashi Ono of Japan won the same number of medals, 13
medals each. ⑤In terms of gold medals, however, Shakhlin
won more than Mangiarotti or Ono, and he even won more
than Andrianov, who won seven gold medals.
30. MacDowell Colony에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
The MacDowell Colony is an artists’ colony, located in
Peterborough, New Hampshire, USA. The colony is designed
to facilitate a balance between social interaction and focus
on work. Private studios are available to artists 24 hours a
day, along with the dining and recreation rooms at Colony
Hall. To ensure all colonists’ autonomy and privacy, no one
may visit a studio without invitation. Breakfast and dinner
are served in the dining room; lunch is delivered to each
studio. After dinner, occasional presentations are a traditional,
elective part of the stimulating and supportive environment.
Friendships established among artists in residence often lead
to collaborations and connections beyond the colony. The
maximum length of residence is two months; the average
stay is five to six weeks.
① 개인 스튜디오가 하루 24시간 이용 가능하다.
② 초대가 없으면 스튜디오를 방문할 수 없다.
③ 점심 식사가 각 스튜디오로 배달된다.
④ 저녁 식사 후에 이따금씩 발표회가 열린다.
⑤ 평균 거주 기간이 2개월이다.
영어영역(B형)
5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
5 8
[31 ~ 36] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. When we are children, our bodies grow automatically. A
year goes by, and we become taller, stronger, more capable
of doing new things and facing new challenges. I think many
people carry into adulthood a subconscious belief that
mental, spiritual, and emotional growth follows a similar
pattern. Time goes by, and we simply get better. We’re like
Charlie Brown in Charles Schulz’s Peanuts comic strip, who
once said, “I think I’ve discovered the secret of life ― you
just hang around until you get used to it.” The problem is
that we don’t improve by simply living. We have to be
about it. Musician Bruce Springsteen commented,
“A time comes when you need to stop waiting for the man
you want to become and start being the man you want to
be.” No one improves by accident. Personal growth doesn’t
just happen on its own.
① content ② defensive ③ intentional
④ thankful ⑤ selfconfident
32. Table manners help us to see that politeness is not, after
all, a disadvantage. Although the illmannered
person can
grab more of the food, he will receive less of the affection;
and fellowship is the real meaning of the meal. Next time,
he will not be invited. Politeness makes you a part of things
and so gives you an enduring edge over those who never
acquired it. And this gives us a clue to the real nature of
rudeness: to be rude is not just to be selfish, in the way
that children (until taught otherwise) and animals are
instinctively selfish; it is to be . Even in the
friendliest gathering, the rude person will reveal, by some
word or gesture, that he is not really part of it. Of course
he is there, a living organism, with wants and needs. But he
does not belong in the conversation. [3점]
① clever ② alone ③ talkative
④ impatient ⑤ curious
33. Can you recall what you bought for your dinner on the
same day last month? Probably not. How about this then:
herdsmen of the Swazi tribe of East Africa are able to
remember in great detail each cow or bull bought a year
ago, including who sold the animal, whether it was a bull, a
cow, or a calf, its age and appearance, and what it was
bartered for. Impressive, huh? Cattle have tremendous social
and economic importance in the Swazi tribe. When the
psychologist Barlett tested these same men on other kinds
of detail, their memory wasn’t better than the average
person’s. The conclusion we can draw from this is that we
tend to to us.
* barter: 물물교환하다
① follow others’ opinions
② stick to what we believe
③ expect our future positively
④ learn better by imitating others
⑤ remember what matters most to us
34. Aristotle learned a lesson in wisdom in fourthcentury
B.C.
Athens, watching the carpenters, shoemakers, blacksmiths,
and boat pilots. Their work was not governed by
systematically applying rules or following rigid procedures.
The materials they worked with were too irregular, and each
task posed new problems. Aristotle thought the choices
craftsmen made in acting on the material world provided
clues to the kind of knowhow
citizens needed to make
moral choices in the social world. Aristotle was particularly
fascinated with how the masons on the Isle of Lesbos used
rulers. A normal, straightedged
ruler was of little use to
the masons who were carving round columns from slabs of
stone and needed to measure the circumference of the
columns. Unless you bent the ruler. Which is exactly what
the masons did. They fashioned a flexible ruler out of lead,
a forerunner of today’s tape measure. For Aristotle, knowing
was exactly what practical wisdom was all
about. [3점]
* circumference: 원의 둘레
① how to bend the rule to fit the circumstance
② what to do to relieve stress from work
③ when to stop and when to begin
④ where to apply rigid procedures
⑤ whom to help with one’s skills
영어영역(B형)
6
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
6 8
35. In one experiment researchers had people sit at computers
and review two online articles describing opposing theories
of learning. One article laid out an argument that “knowledge
is objective”; the other made the case that “knowledge is
relative.” Each article was set up in the same way, with
similar headings, and each had links to the other article,
allowing a reader to jump quickly between the two to
compare the theories. The researchers hypothesized that
people who used the links would gain a richer understanding
of the two theories and their differences than would people
who read the pages sequentially, completing one before
going on to the other. They were wrong. The test subjects
who read the pages linearly actually scored considerably
higher on a subsequent comprehension test than those who
clicked back and forth between the pages. ,
the researchers concluded.
① The links helped to organize information
② Using the links got in the way of learning
③ Attitude is more important than knowledge
④ The more links, the higher level of popularity
⑤ The Web motivates people to read more articles
36. For a huntergatherer
ancestor, it would have been useful
to make plans and be able to follow through with them. It
might be very advantageous to carefully and deliberately
develop skills in toolmaking,
a development whose payoff
might be years away, rather than just try to use whatever
can be grabbed when a tool is needed. However, much of
huntergatherer
life is unplannable because of events. It
would really not be a good response, observing a passing
herd of wildebeest, to say, “Actually, Wednesday is my
honeygathering
day.” Life for a huntergatherer
would be a
series of urgent improvisations on the stimuli occurring right
now, be they passing prey, the lack of passing prey, attacks
by others, changes in the makeup
of the group, or countless
other possibilities. People would do well who could
and quickly mobilize an energetic,
spontaneous, physical response to whatever happened to turn
up. [3점]
① decide to work independently
② choose wise leaders to guide them
③ abandon plans at the moment’s notice
④ follow the footsteps of their ancestors
⑤ make a lot of friends in their line of work
37. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
When scientists created a hunk of mass called the
international prototype kilogram(IPK), and distributed about
40 of these prototype kilograms to other countries, they
realized contaminants could coat the kilogram’s surface. To
try to counteract this effect, they made the masses into
cylinders, which have less surface area to acquire dust and
debris. (A) , the fundamental unit of mass has gained
tens of micrograms of mass from surface contamination. A
skilled technician will rub the cylinders with alcohol, but
because every country cleans their kilograms differently and
at different times, each kilogram in the world is off by a
different, unknown amount. (B) , each country that
has one of these standard masses has a slightly different
definition of the kilogram, which could throw off science
experiments that require very precise weight measurements
or international trade in items that are highly restricted by
weight. * IPK: 국제 킬로그램 표준기
(A) (B)
① In addition For example
② In addition On the contrary
③ Nevertheless As a result
④ Nevertheless Likewise
⑤ In other words Furthermore
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Wise leaders don’t just encourage followers to reveal
bad news. They dig for evidence that clashes with their
presumptions.
(A) They also believed he was strongly prounion
and
resisted providing information that could help supervisors
run the plant during a strike. These assumptions were
dashed when a foreman asked the mechanic why he
wasn’t writing things down.
(B) His answer was simple: He felt he had lousy penmanship
and was ashamed to have his writing on display. Snare
concludes, “Walk around, look, ask questions. Asking
questions is the best source of information, yet it is the
least used.”
(C) Veteran project manager Paul Snare tells how, in a big
diaper plant in Michigan, supervisors believed their best
mechanic wasn’t documenting his work because he wanted
to maintain an information edge over coworkers.
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
영어영역(B형)
7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
7 8
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
Instead, it indicates that a very specific question served
as a negative stimulus and really bothered the person.
I look for lip compression or disappearing lips during
interviews or when someone is making a declarative
statement. ( ① ) This is such a reliable cue that it will
show up precisely at the moment a difficult question is
asked. ( ② ) If you see it, that doesn’t necessarily mean the
person is lying. ( ③ ) For example, if I ask someone, “Are
you hiding something from me?” and he compresses his lips
as I ask the question, he is hiding something. ( ④ ) This is
especially accurate if it is the only time he has concealed or
compressed his lips during our discussion. ( ⑤ ) It is a
signal that I need to push further in questioning this person.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
In one experiment, 49 college students were asked to
sit at a cluttered cubicle, a tidy cubicle, or one that was
inbetween.
After sitting at the desk, the volunteers
were asked to rate on a scale of one to nine how well a
series of statements fit them: “It upsets me to go into
complicated situations,” “I would like to simplify my life
as much as I can,” “I would like to keep things simple,”
and “I am bothered by complicated things.” Next the
volunteers were given a test in which they needed to
sort 33 products into groups — the volunteers had to
come up with an organizing principle themselves. When
the results were in, it was clear that people sitting at
messy desks came up with much simpler organizing
principles. They were also the ones who scored high on
questions like, “I would like to simplify my life as much
as I can.”
􋾞
The experiment above showed that the (A) of
the place where people were increased their need for
(B) .
(A) (B)
① messiness simplicity
② messiness security
③ decoration attention
④ decoration perfection
⑤ temperature relaxation
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Location of events is key to newsworthiness. The
nearer something happens to your readers, the more
they should care about it. For example, the news may
be that a school in your state has adopted a new
attendance policy that allows seniors to call themselves
in sick at the attendance office. That’s newsworthy. It’s
interesting. Right? Now imagine that same event
happened, not just in your state, but in your own school.
Which story is more newsworthy? Which would more
readers care to read?
But again, that’s not to say that news that happens
only in your own backyard should make it to print. No,
what good journalists need to do is news
events. Even if they happen miles away, most (if not
all) stories can be made more proximal. You just have to
ask the right questions, questions that, inevitably, your
readers should ask.
Let’s say the story is that a high school golfer in a
state other than your own has been kicked off the team
for using illegal clubs. Just ask the right questions.
Could this happen at your own school? Why? Why not?
What are the rules governing club use in golf? What are
the rules to prevent cheating in other sports? Do some
students get around those rules? How? See what I
mean? Even events that don’t happen next door have
meaning. It’s up to you to provide that “closeness,” that
proximity, to your readers.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① Accuracy: The Power of News Stories
② Bad News Travels Faster than Good News
③ The Closer to the Reader, the More Newsworthy
④ Sports News: The Most Popular News Category
⑤ Popularity Is Not a Goal in News Reporting
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① localize ② update ③ summarize
④ distribute ⑤ collect
영어영역(B형)
8
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
8 8
[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Recently, Sylvia Sebring had a series of dreams in
which she saw a light gray mare standing in a corral.
The horse had a severe limp, and, what was most
unsettling, the mare was telepathically asking her for
help. Witnessing the plight of an injured horse was
certainly not an unusual experience for Sylvia Sebring.
(a) She is a vet and deals daily with suffering animals.
But to dream repeatedly of an injured horse that was
unknown to her was a unique occurrence for her. What
did the horse want her to do? * corral: 가축우리
(B)
When Sylvia Sebring visited the corral at the Marana
Stockyards and saw the Arabian mare, (b) she knew
immediately that the horse was the same light gray mare
that she had seen in her dreams. Ms. Sebring knew that
she had received the horse’s cry for help, and she was
there to answer that desperate entreaty. At last, the
outcry from an abandoned and injured horse had been
answered. (c) She was now the proud owner of the
Arabian mare and called her Dream Walker.
* entreaty: 간청
(C)
Ms. Sebring felt an eerie shock of recognition as she
read about the mare found in the desert. The horse in
the desert seemed to perfectly fit the horse in her
dreams. Could it be that the horse had been sending her
desperate messages in her dreams that (d) she needed
to come and rescue it? Prompted to do some
investigation regarding the condition and present location
of the rescued horse, Ms. Sebring learned that the
animal was due to be auctioned at the Marana
Stockyards soon.
(D)
One day a local newspaper carried a story about a
rescued horse that had been abandoned to die by drug
smugglers in the desert. A US Customs Service aircraft
had sighted the mare lying nearly dead. The horse had
lain in the terrible heat of the desert with no water for
at least a week. The newspaper story described the
horse as a white Arabian mare, and stated that (e) she
had a twelveinch
cut on one of her legs.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위　글의 Sylvia Sebring에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 부상당한 말이 나오는 꿈을 여러 번 꾸었다.
② 구조된 말을 Marana Stockyards에서 보았다.
③ Dream Walker의 주인이 되었다.
④ 부상당한 말을 구조하기 위해 사막에 갔다.
⑤ 구조된 말이 경매될 것임을 알게 되었다.
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.

1
8
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지 1
1번부터 22번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, I don’t have a computer.
② Right, I’ll call you when I’m done.
③ Yeah, I saved it in my cell phone.
④ Yes, I’ll buy you a new cell phone.
⑤ Sorry, you’ve got the wrong number.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It’s true. She’ll start reading sooner or later.
② I’ll ask her teacher to choose her next time.
③ Right. She must go to a new school.
④ Sorry to hear that. Better luck next time.
⑤ Great. She must have worked on reading a lot.
3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, I’m not sure where you’re going.
② You’re welcome. I’m happy to watch him.
③ Don’t worry. I’ll come over around 10 a.m.
④ Never mind. I’ll make him dinner tomorrow.
⑤ Okay. I’ll let him play but only for an hour.
4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 제철 과일 소비를 권장하려고
② 과일 보관 용기를 광고하려고
③ 얼룩 제거 용품을 홍보하려고
④ 과일 껍질 활용법을 소개하려고
⑤ 과일 껍질의 영양소를 설명하려고
5. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 뇌우 발생 시 대처 요령
② 뇌우의 다양한 발생 원인
③ 지구의 급격한 기후 변화
④ 날씨와 심리 변화의 상관관계
⑤ 날씨가 야외 활동에 미치는 영향
6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 양초를 만드는 절차
② 등산 시 유의할 사항
③ 적절한 휴식의 필요성
④ 취미 생활을 하는 이유
⑤ 스트레스의 다양한 요인
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아이와 함께 텃밭을 가꾸면 아이가 채소를 잘 먹게 된다.
② 텃밭에서 채소를 직접 기르면 가족 경제에 도움이 된다.
③ 가족의 건강을 위해 유기농 채소를 구입할 필요가 있다.
④ 지역 농산물을 구입하면 경제 활성화에 기여할 수 있다.
⑤ 채소 위주의 식습관은 아이의 두뇌 발달을 촉진한다.
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 상담 교사 － 학생
② 여행사 직원 － 여행객
③ 수의사 － 애완동물 주인
④ 동물원 사육사 － 관람객
⑤ 국립공원 직원 － 탐방객
9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 마중 나가기 ② 쿠키 사다 주기
③ 도시락 주문하기 ④ 교통사고 신고하기
⑤ 사무실에 데려다 주기
제 3 교시
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 영어 영역(B 형)
2
8
11. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to rent a laptop ② to visit a museum
③ to surf the Internet ④ to find some photos
⑤ to review the report
12. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 배낭여행을 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 할아버지 댁에서 지내야 해서
② 친구와 만날 약속이 있어서
③ 부모님이 허락하지 않아서
④ 방학 숙제를 해야 해서
⑤ 제주도에 가야 해서
13. 대화를 듣고, 선거 포스터에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 후보 기호 ② 후보 사진
③ 학교 로고 ④ 학교 사진
⑤ 선거 슬로건
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $215 ② $225 ③ $240 ④ $250 ⑤ $270
15. 장학금에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① 선정 과정은 두 단계로 구성된다.
② 면접관은 학생들이 추천한 교사들이다.
③ 개인별로 학기당 $1,000가 지급된다.
④ 신청 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
⑤ 3명의 수혜자는 다음 달에 발표될 것이다.
16. four-eyed fish에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오. [3점]
① 각각의 눈이 두 부분으로 나누어져 있다.
② 수면 아래위를 동시에 볼 수 있다.
③ 남아메리카에서 주로 발견된다.
④ 작은 물고기를 잡아먹기도 한다.
⑤ 작은 어항에서 키우기에 적합하다.
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 선택한 복사기 모델을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
18. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① You must have enjoyed the party a lot.
② It’s nice of you to take care of my baby.
③ I’m so excited that your baby can walk now.
④ I can’t wait to see what your baby will choose.
⑤ Thank you for inviting me to your graduation party.
19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Maybe your luck has run out.
② Your wish has finally become a reality.
③ You’d better apply for the music program.
④ If you keep it up, you might get tickets.
⑤ I’m so surprised that you were on TV.
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Julia가 Samuel에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Julia: Samuel,
① could you give me a ride home?
② would you teach me how to park?
③ when did you get your driver’s license?
④ what happened after you parked your car?
⑤ how many times did you take the road test?
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① developmental stages of human history
② the characteristics of scientific inventions
③ the difference between speaking and writing
④ the significance of writing in human history
⑤ ways to promote invention in the modern world
22. 인류의 발명품으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 전구 ② 비행기
③ 전화기 ④ 현미경
⑤ 망원경
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
영어 영역(B 형) 3
3
8
23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Everyone would like to assume that their wonderful,
creative ideas will sell themselves. But as Galileo, Edvard
Munch, Toni Morrison, Sylvia Plath, and millions of others
have discovered, they do not. On the contrary, creative ideas
are usually viewed with suspicion and distrust. Thus, students
need to learn how to persuade other people of the value of
their ideas. This selling is part of the practical aspect of
creative thinking. If students do a science project, it is a good
idea for them to present it and demonstrate why it makes an
important contribution. If they develop a plan for a new form
of government, they should explain why it is better than the
existing form of government.
① 공정한 판단은 타인의 의견을 경청하는 데서 시작된다.
② 창의적 사고는 문제점을 분석하는 것으로부터 출발한다.
③ 과학 프로젝트는 학생들의 창의적 사고 형성에 도움이 된다.
④ 학생들은 창의적 생각을 남에게 납득시키는 방법을 배워야 한다.
⑤ 학생들은 창의적 사고의 가치를 실용적 측면에서 분석해야 한다.
24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
In the nineteenth century, a decisive moment occurred when
people in advertising and journalism discovered that if they
framed their stories and appeals with fear, they could capture
our attention. It is an emotion we find hard to resist or control,
and so they constantly shifted our focus to new possible
sources of anxiety: the latest health scare, the new crime
wave, and endless hazards in the environment of which we
were not aware. With the increasing sophistication of the
media and the haunting quality of the imagery, they have been
able to give us the feeling that we are fragile creatures in an
environment full of danger ― even though we live in a world
infinitely safer and more predictable than anything our
ancestors knew. With their help, our anxieties have only
increased.
① the crisis of modern journalism
② the various sources of human fears
③ the media’s exploitation of human anxieties
④ the importance of advertising and journalism
⑤ the fragile nature of human life in modern society
25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
In the past, many public-sector recreation providers allowed
people free access or charged for permits to control the
amount or season for different recreational activities such as
fishing or horse-riding. However, governments and other
public agencies are finding that funding to maintain sites and
facilities, to cope with increased demand on the landscape, is
becoming difficult to maintain. Opportunities to charge
visitors for appropriate services to help compensate for these
costs are being considered as one solution. This is a sensitive
matter, as free access for all people to the outdoors is a much
cherished right. There is also an additional dilemma for public
agencies where recreation facilities are already provided from
public money, and it could be argued that the taxpayer is
being charged twice. Thus, care is needed by public bodies to
ensure that charges are only made for services that are clearly
additional to the provision of free access.
① How to Use Public Facilities for Outdoor Activities
② Public Recreation Services: To Charge or Not?
③ Access to Public Facilities: Denied or Delayed?
④ A Short History of Public Recreation Facilities
⑤ Preserving the Landscape: Torn Between Two Demands
26. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Zaynab Fawwaz was born into a poor family in South
Lebanon. As a young girl ① she went to Alexandria with the
Egyptian family for whom she worked. Her mistress was
intrigued by her maid’s native intelligence and introduced
Zaynab to ② her literate friend, Fatima. She, in turn, taught
her reading, writing and arithmetic. Zaynab quickly learned
what ③ her teacher had to offer and in time went on to study
with Egyptian scholars. Eventually, ④ she became very active
in women’s issues and she wrote some pioneering poetry and
essays focused on women’s rights. The most famous of ⑤ her
essays was The Zaynab Letters.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 영어 영역(B 형)
4
8
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Given that music appears to enhance physical and
mental skills, are there circumstances where music is
① damaging to performance? One domain ② which this is of
considerable significance is music’s potentially damaging
effects on the ability to drive safely. Evidence suggests an
association between loud, fast music and reckless driving, but
how might music’s ability to influence driving in this way
③ be explained? One possibility is that drivers adjust to
temporal regularities in music, and ④ that their speed is
influenced accordingly. In other words, just as faster music
causes people to eat faster, ⑤ so it causes people to drive at
faster speeds, as they engage mentally and physically with
ongoing repeated structures in the music.
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
England’s plan to establish colonies in North America,
starting in the late sixteenth century, was founded on a
(A) false / valid idea. It was generally assumed that Virginia,
the region of the North American continent to which
England laid claim, would have the same climate as the
Mediterranean region of Europe, since it lay at similar
latitudes. As a result, the English hoped that the American
colonies, once established, would be able to supply
Mediterranean goods such as olives and fruit and reduce England’s
(B) dependence / restriction on imports from continental Europe.
One prospectus claimed that the colonies would provide “the
wines, fruit and salt of France and Spain ... the silks of Persia
and Italy.” Similarly, (C) abundant / scarce timber would do
away with the need to import wood from Scandinavia. In
short, America was mistakenly expected to be a land of plenty
that would quickly turn a profit.
* latitude: 위도 ** prospectus: 사업 설명서, 투자 설명서
(A) (B) (C)
① false …… dependence …… abundant
② false …… dependence …… scarce
③ false …… restriction …… abundant
④ valid …… restriction …… scarce
⑤ valid …… restriction …… abundant
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the comparison between the
allocated budget and actual spending for six departments at
Triton Ventures in 2012. ① The Customer Service department
was allocated 60,000 dollars, which was greater than the
amount allocated to any other department. ② On the other
hand, in terms of actual spending, the top two departments
that spent the most were Marketing and Development. ③ The
Customer Service and Information Technology departments
spent the same amount of money, which was 20,000 dollars.
④ The actual spending by the Administration department was
less than half the allocated budget. ⑤ The Sales department
showed the largest gap between the allocated budget and its
actual spending among the six departments.
30. Georgia O’Keeffe에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
In her art, Georgia O’Keeffe clearly showed a pioneering
spirit and an intensely individual style. At age twenty-seven,
while teaching art in South Carolina, O’Keeffe began a series
of simple, abstract charcoal drawings that expressed her own
ideas and feelings. She sent these drawings to a friend in New
York, who showed them to Alfred Stieglitz, the owner of the
influential gallery 291. Stieglitz hailed them as the “purest,
finest, sincerest things.” O’Keeffe’s greatest source of
inspiration was nature. Her best-known paintings are large,
extreme close-ups of flowers; the simplified and magnified
views compel us to look at them in a new way and to discover
their inner essence. At the same time, the paintings become
abstract arrangements of color and line, light and shadow.
While in New Mexico, she was also fascinated by the simple
geometric grace of adobe churches and the majesty of the
desert.
* adobe: 흙을 재료로 한 건축 양식의 일종
① 27세에 South Carolina에서 미술을 가르쳤다.
② 자신의 드로잉 작품들을 Stieglitz에게 보냈다.
③ 영감을 얻은 가장 큰 원천은 자연이었다.
④ 가장 잘 알려진 그림들은 클로즈업한 꽃 그림이다.
⑤ New Mexico에서 사막의 장엄함에 매료되었다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
영어 영역(B 형) 5
5
8
[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Appearance creates the first impression customers have of
food, and first impressions are important. No matter how
appealing the taste, an unattractive appearance is hard to
overlook. As humans, we do “eat with our eyes” because our
sense of sight is more highly developed than the other senses.
The sense of sight is so highly developed in humans that
messages received from other senses are often ignored if they
conflict with what is seen. Yellow candy is expected to be
lemon-flavored, and if it is grape-flavored, many people
. Strawberry
ice cream tinted with red food coloring seems to have a
stronger strawberry flavor than one that has no added food
coloring, even when there is no real difference.
① cannot correctly identify the flavor
② will not favor the grape-flavored candy
③ can clearly sense the difference in flavor
④ will be instantly attracted to the grape flavor
⑤ will enjoy the subtle difference between them
32. The Rust Belt is notorious for its poor air quality. For
decades, coal plants, steel production, and auto emissions
have pumped particulates like sulfate into the atmosphere over
the eastern U.S. Especially before air quality laws began
appearing in the 1970s, particulate pollution was behind acid
rain, respiratory disease, and ozone depletion. But a new study
from Harvard University suggests that the Rust Belt’s thick
particulate fog may have helped slow down the effects of
climate change, particularly when it was thickest. Throughout
the 20th century, global temperatures have gone up by just
under one degree Celsius. But in the U.S., eastern and central
states haven’t seen the same rise. In fact, temperatures there
actually decreased over the same period. The reason seems to
be particulate pollution. Instead of trapping warm air in the
atmosphere like carbon dioxide, fine particles like sulfate
reflect the sun’s light and heat. They may even group with
watery cloud droplets, which do the same thing. The effect
is .
* particulate: 분진, 미립 물질
① an accumulation of carbon dioxide
② a net cooling across entire regions
③ a steep acceleration of global warming
④ a significant improvement in air quality
⑤ a slow but steady increase in temperatures
33. Suppose a survivor from an airplane crash with severe
injuries struggles for days through the jungle but dies just
before reaching a village. It is tempting to think “if only he had
managed to walk to the village, he would have been rescued.”
But suppose you must try to console the victim’s relatives.
What might you say? Or suppose you wish to defend the
rescue team who got as far as the village but no further.
Your motivation to console or defend may influence the
alternative you imagine. You may decide to emphasize the
severity of the victim’s injuries and suggest “even if he had
managed to walk to the village, he still would have died.”
Sometimes thoughts about what might have been change an
antecedent event (the victim walked to the village) but leave
the outcome unchanged (he still died). “Even if...”
conditionals have been called “semifactual” because they
combine a counterfactual antecedent and a factual consequence.
Imagined semifactual alternatives are intriguing because,
unlike other thoughts about what might have been, they
suggest that . [3점]
① the consequence is unimaginable
② the antecedent is inevitable
③ the outcome is inevitable
④ the antecedent is unpredictable
⑤ the consequence is unpredictable
34. The so-called Mozart effect ― listening to Mozart will
make your child smarter ― is a good example of
by the media
through hype not warranted by the research. It all started when
researchers reported that after exposure to a selection of
Mozart’s music, college students showed an increase in spatial
reasoning for about 10 minutes on tasks like putting together
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. Note first that the research was done
on college students, not infants, and that the effect was very
brief. In addition, no one’s been able to replicate the research.
The increase in spatial reasoning, it turns out, can be generated
by any auditory stimulation (e.g., listening to a short story or
other types of music) that keeps people alert while being tested.
However, none of this has stopped eager parents ― spurred on
by fantastic claims from unethical companies ― from
purchasing Mozart CDs for their babies. [3점]
* hype: 과대 광고(선전)
① the bond between parents and children exaggerated
② a genuine scientific innovation being discarded
③ a scientific finding being distorted
④ the correlation between reasoning and music being rejected
⑤ the convergence of music and physiology made possible
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 영어 영역(B 형)
6
8
35. As the structures of our world and the conditions of
certainty have yielded to an avalanche of change, the
extent of our longing for stable, definitive leadership
. The fault
lies not with leadership but rather with ourselves and our
expectations. In the old days, leaders were supposed to
make sense of chaos, to make certainty out of doubt, and
to create positive action plans for the resolution of
paradoxes. Good leaders straightened things out. Should
chaos rear its ugly head, the leader was expected to restore
normality immediately. But chaos is now considered
normal, paradoxes cannot be resolved, and certainty is
possible only to the level of high probability. Leadership
that attempts to deliver in terms of fixing any of these can
only fail. And that is exactly what is happening. [3점]
* an avalanche of: 많은, 쇄도하는
① can only be measured by our will to establish it
② has made traditional leadership more irreplaceable
③ can create viable action plans for restoring normality
④ has vastly reduced the probability of resolving paradoxes
⑤ has been exceeded only by the impossibility of finding it
[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36. When a company comes out with a new product, its
competitors typically go on the defensive, doing whatever
they can to (A) the odds that the offering will eat
into their sales. Responses might include increasing marketing
efforts, offering discounts to channel partners, and even
lobbying for regulations that would hinder the rival’s
expansion. In many cases, though, such actions are misguided.
Although the conventional wisdom that a rival’s launch will
hurt profits is often correct, my research shows that
companies sometimes see profits increase after a rival’s
launch. The underlying mechanism is pretty simple: When a
company comes out with a new product, it often raises the
prices of its existing products. This might be designed to
make the new product look (B) and thus more
attractive by comparison. As that company adjusts its pricing,
its competitors can do the same without risking customer
defections over price. [3점]
* defection: 이탈
(A) (B)
① calculate …… exceptional
② calculate …… more striking
③ eliminate …… more upgraded
④ reduce …… up-to-date
⑤ reduce …… cheaper
37. All human societies have economic systems within which
goods and services are produced, distributed, and consumed.
In one sense, the economic aspect of culture is simply the sum
of the choices people make regarding these areas of their
lives. These choices critically determine much of people’s
lives. (A) , choosing to become a farmer rather
than an insurance broker may determine where you live, who
you are likely to meet, the sorts of behaviors you will expect
in your spouse and offspring, and so on. However, such
choices are not unlimited; rather, they are limited by our
cultures, traditions, and technologies. (B) , our
environments set the boundaries within which choices about
the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and
services are made. To the extent that economic systems are
part of culture, people in different cultures have different sorts
of economic behavior.
(A) (B)
① By contrast …… Consequently
② For example …… Conversely
③ For example …… Furthermore
④ Similarly …… Instead
⑤ Similarly …… Nevertheless
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Organic farmers grow crops that are no less plagued by
pests than those of conventional farmers; insects generally
do not discriminate between organic and conventional as
well as we do.
(A) However, most organic farmers have no choice but to rely
on chemicals as necessary supplements to their operations.
With pests often consuming up to 40 percent of the crops
grown in the United States, they do so as a matter of
course.
(B) They might refer to these substances as “botanical
extracts.” But according to Ned Groth, a senior scientist
at Consumers Union, these toxins “are not necessarily
less worrisome because they are natural.”
(C) It is true that they are far more likely than conventional
farmers to practice environmentally beneficial forms of
biological control, and that they are also more likely to
sensibly diversify their crops to reduce infestation.
* infestation: 횡행, 만연
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
영어 영역(B 형) 7
7
8
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
But the ones in which he could get up and do things like
industrial arts, drama, science projects, or P.E. were always
his favorites.
Jason always seemed to have a tough time in classes, except
in the ones where he could do something. In the classes in
which the teachers just stood and talked, or told everyone to
read, he seemed to get bored and restless. ( ① ) He soon
realized that he was not a slow or unmotivated learner; he was
a kinesthetic learner. ( ② ) Once he figured this out, he
started to use this information to his advantage. ( ③ ) He
would draw out what he learned from class on notes, posters,
and doodles. ( ④ ) He would act out things and work with
other students on projects using role play and drama. ( ⑤ )
This helped his learning come alive, and he was less bored. As
a result, he not only enjoyed school more, but his grades also
went up.
* kinesthetic: 운동 감각의
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
A narrative is not a myth the first time it is told, but only a
story or an account. What makes a story a myth is the fact
that it is received by a given society and that a given society
participates in its transmission. Obviously, it is difficult to
determine just when any story becomes a myth, but it is
clear that a narrative is not a myth when it is first told. The
intentions of the first narrator and the last narrator can be
the same, but this still does not give any special status to the
creator of a myth. It is far more important to realize that the
intentions of a given society in transmitting a narrative may
have nothing to do with the purposes of its author. Thus we
can never identify any individual creator of a myth. So long
as myth is a collective narrative by definition, the only
relevant consideration are the mentality and purposes of the
society for which the myth is a myth.
󰀻
Given the (A) nature of a myth, a narrative becomes
a myth only when a given society accepts and (B) it,
regardless of the intentions of its author.
(A) (B)
① collective …… transmits
② creative …… distributes
③ mental …… modernizes
④ primitive …… circulates
⑤ social …… evaluates
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Carrying capacity is the number of individuals that the
local resources can sustain. Individuals in a population that
has exceeded the carrying capacity of its habitat may have
poor health and suffer from malnutrition because of the
compromised living conditions. When this happens, the
weakest individuals may die, or the population as a whole
may become more vulnerable to further environmental stress
or disease. Sometimes a large number of individuals in a
population die as a result of overshooting the carrying
capacity of their habitat. This is known as a die-off.
Certain animals and plants have a built-in sense of
carrying capacity, so that instead of overshooting and having
a die-off, they remain within the limits of their habitat’s
ability to support them. Lake trout, for instance, stop
breeding as prolifically when the population density
increases too dramatically. Although this is the result of
individual responses to chemical signals from other trout
rather than a thought-out response on the part of the trout,
the result is that population numbers may
for extended periods. The trout will produce more offspring
and mature to a reproductive size at a faster rate when
populations are threatened, such as when aggressive fishing
takes place. When space and food are scarce, such as when a
lot of fish are living together in a small pond, the trout
remain smaller and reproduce more slowly. Experiments
have shown that no matter what number of lake trout a pond
is stocked with in the beginning, the population will increase
until it reaches a particular density, then level off at about the
same number.
* prolific: 다산(多産)의
41. 윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① nature’s way of regulating population density
② the relationship between nutrition and reproduction
③ the significance of habitat protection for local ecosystems
④ the necessity of protecting the lake trout population
⑤ how to preserve various habitats for lake trout
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① rise quickly
② be countless
③ remain steady
④ be unknown
⑤ fall to zero
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 영어 영역(B 형)
8
8
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
In Australia a few years ago, I met a remarkable man
named John Walton. He has since become a close friend. He
told me that when he started out in life he seemed to be
caught in a peculiar failure pattern. Whatever he tried would
start out well and then end up badly. As a schoolboy he
dropped out of several schools for this reason. He became
convinced that it was his destiny in life to make good
beginnings and then watch them fade away.
(B)
The speaker also said, “Most of you are letting the fear of
failure hold you back. All the ingredients of success are right
there inside you, if you’ll just turn your thinking around.
Don’t keep telling yourself you can’t do this or you can’t do
that. You can do ANYTHING if you think you can!” John
had never heard anything like this in his whole life. He
realized for the first time that his image of himself as a
person who started well and then faded away was all in his
head, a state of mind that could be altered any time he made
a firm decision to alter it.
(C)
At one point, John got a job with the Australian division of a
famous American company. The same dreary pattern seemed
to be unfolding: He started out well, and then things began to
slide. This didn’t surprise him much; it was what he expected
to happen. Then the company sent a motivational speaker out
to give some talks to their Australian employees, and John
was in the audience. The visitor told his listeners to visualize
themselves moving up in the company, receiving promotions,
gaining energy as they went, right up to the very top.
(D)
John went back to work with tremendous enthusiasm and
confidence and energy. He received promotions. He became
the manager of a branch in New South Wales. Finally he
became the head of the company for all of Australia. Where
once he had been dogged by failure, now everything he did
was crowned by success. He told me, “It was that one talk
that changed my self-image by giving it a little twist. It made
me see myself differently, and so I was different.”
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Stir Your Sleeping Creativity!
② The Cycle of Success and Failure
③ Failure: A Stepping Stone to Success
④ Be Positive and Success Will Embrace You
⑤ Career Development: Investment for Your Life
45. 윗글의 John Walton에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 호주에서 필자(‘I’)를 만났다.
② 학창 시절에 여러 학교를 그만두었다.
③ 유명한 미국 회사의 호주 지사에 일자리를 얻었다.
④ 동기 부여 강연회의 연설자로 참석하였다.
⑤ New South Wales에 있는 지사의 매니저가 되었다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

1번부터 22번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. You’ll love the activity you’ve signed up for.
② Don’t worry. You’ll make a lot of friends.
③ Good. You should stop your bad habits.
④ You’re right. My schedule isn’t always full.
⑤ Okay. Let me explain the activities one by one.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That was the best coffee I’ve ever tasted.
② I’ve been standing in line for 20 minutes.
③ No wonder this place is crowded with people.
④ That’s because I already bought a coffee maker.
⑤ Be careful not to burn your mouth with the coffee.
3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. What’s the best tourist attraction to visit?
② How much money should I budget for souvenirs?
③ Yeah, you’re right. It’s better to be safe than sorry.
④ I know. I need to check the weight of my luggage.
⑤ No. The insurance doesn’t cover this emergency case.
4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 진공청소기를 광고하려고
② 청소 대행업체를 소개하려고
③ 전자 제품 매장을 홍보하려고
④ 층간 소음 줄이기를 부탁하려고
⑤ 청소기 작동 방법을 설명하려고
5. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 사과가 건강에 좋은 이유
② 규칙적인 식습관의 중요성
③ 과일을 통한 노화 예방책
④ 신선한 사과 선별 기준
⑤ 효과적인 사과 보관법
6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 여가 시간 활용법
② 재택근무의 장점
③ 교통 체증의 원인
④ 에너지 절약의 중요성
⑤ 업무 스트레스 해소법
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 전자 제품 가격이 지나치게 상승하고 있다.
② 전자 제품 폐기물 문제가 심각해지고 있다.
③ 전자 제품 사용법이 점점 더 복잡해지고 있다.
④ 에너지 효율이 높은 전자 제품 사용이 중요하다.
⑤ 사용자 의견을 반영한 전자 제품 개발이 필요하다.
8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 교사 － 학생 ② 감독 － 배우
③ 점원 － 고객 ④ 코치 － 선수
⑤ 화가 － 모델
9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 점심 사다 주기 ② 식당 함께 가기
③ 사진 찍어 주기 ④ 잡지 구매하기
⑤ 기사 작성하기
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to buy some drinks for the meeting
② to borrow the printer from the sales department
③ to print out the new contract at the Internet Cafe
④ to set up the new schedule for the meeting
⑤ to make a phone call to the repairperson
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 카메라를 싸게 구입한 이유를 고르시오.
① 공동으로 구매해서 ② 쿠폰이 있어서
③ 할인 기간이어서 ④ 반품된 상품이어서
⑤ 진열 상품이어서
13. 대화를 듣고, 자동차 렌트 시 고려할 사항으로 두 사람이
언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 자동차 크기 ② 연료 소비량
③ 도로 상태 ④ 자동차 보험
⑤ 렌트 기간
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $27 ② $36 ③ $40 ④ $45 ⑤ $54
15. Future Lawyers’ Internship Program에 관한 다음 설명을
듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 대학교 4학년 학생은 지원 가능하다.
② 지원자는 법학 전공자이어야 한다.
③ 영어 실력이 좋은 지원자가 유리하다.
④ 지원 가능 연령에 제한이 있다.
⑤ 지원 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
16. Tasmanian tiger에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 약 4,000년 전까지 호주 대륙에 살았었다.
② 등에 검은 줄무늬가 있었다.
③ 위장은 한 번에 많은 먹이를 먹을 수 있도록 늘어났다.
④ 들개와의 경쟁에서 져서 Tasmania 섬에서 멸종되었다.
⑤ 양을 키우는 농부에 의해서 사냥을 당했다.
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 여행 상품을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
18. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① I’m sure you’ll enjoy reading the book, too.
② Okay. I’m going to make a list of my own.
③ I agree. It’s really difficult to reach the goal.
④ Don’t give up, and you can fulfill your dreams.
⑤ Well, keeping a diary helps you to find a solution.
19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Everything will be over before you even realize it.
② It seems you’ve adapted to your surroundings well.
③ Sounds like you’re taking on more than you can handle.
④ Cramming all night will distract you from your tasks.
⑤ Scratching the surface will never accomplish the goal.
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jane이 Tom에게 할 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
Jane:
① I can’t agree with you on the ticket price.
② I really can’t wait to meet the fans tonight.
③ Our concert will definitely be a big success.
④ The safety of the audience is our first concern.
⑤ I’m pleased that many people enjoyed the concert.
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① effects of air pollution on farming
② ways to promote local fruit farming
③ problems caused by food transportation
④ origins of various agricultural produce
⑤ the change in food production patterns
22. 식품으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① tomatoes ② kiwi fruits
③ bananas ④ apples
⑤ lettuce
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
When people expect to see someone again, they are
more likely to find that person attractive, regardless of the
individual’s behavior, than if they do not have expectations
of future interaction. The expectation of future interaction
motivates people to look for positive qualities in someone
so that they will look forward to future interactions rather
than dread them, and increases the chances that people
will find the individual attractive. Conversely, when people
interact with someone whom they do not foresee meeting
again, they have little reason to search for positive
qualities. In fact, doing so may be depressing, given that
they may not have the opportunity to get to know the
person better in future interactions. Indeed, people are
sometimes motivated to find negative qualities in
individuals whom they do not expect to see again.
① 다시 만날 가능성 여부가 상대방을 평가하는 데 영향을 준다.
② 바라는 것이 많을수록 상대방에 대한 단점을 발견하기 쉽다.
③ 상대방을 배려하는 자세가 원만한 대인 관계를 가능케 한다.
④ 타인에 대한 평가 기준으로 성격이 외모보다 우선시된다.
⑤ 첫인상은 상대방과의 향후 관계를 예측하는 기준이 된다.
24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Even when scientists are able to identify seemingly
beneficial nutrients, they cannot always understand how
those nutrients will operate in a real-life context, in the
course of our daily meals. Fruits and vegetables are believed
to help prevent cancer. Scientists have believed that it is the
antioxidants in these foods that make the difference ―
compounds like beta carotene, lycopene, and vitamin E. Yet
when these molecules were extracted from fruits and
vegetables and made into supplements, they did not reduce
cancer. The beta carotene supplement actually increased the
risk of certain cancers. In other words, scientists thoroughly
misunderstood the causes of complex events. They identified
one element engaged in the process of nutrition without
fully comprehending how the system as a whole truly
functions. Nutritional scientists ― pursuing the hot paradigm
of isolating nutrients ― failed to see a multitude of links in
the complex chain that leads to good health.
* antioxidant: 산화 방지제
① problems of making nutritional supplements out of plants
② needs for an alternative scientific method for isolating
nutrients
③ insufficient understanding of how nutrients work in the
whole system
④ potential benefits of extracting molecules from fruits
and vegetables
⑤ challenge of finding beneficial nutrients that may help
prevent cancers
25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Artists create artistic works to get viewers to have
certain kinds of experiences. But the intention to convey
certain experiences to viewers is sometimes secondary to
the intention to express the artistic imagination creatively.
Consider actions generally for the moment. Think, for
example, of people watching their favorite sporting team.
Whether it is at an actual match or in a bar, at crucial
periods in a game people tend to make gestures in
anticipation or cheer in exhortation. They often want to
convey their sense of urgency to the team, or people at
the bar may want to show their disgust to others in the
crowd. But they often express themselves in this manner
without any thought for what others think or how they
may respond. Actions we perform through which we
intend to express our feelings, thoughts, and attitudes
need not have any communicative intent for how others
may respond. At least some works should be understood
as the representation of just this kind of action.
* exhortation: 권고, 충고
① Artistic Act: To Express Rather than to Communicate
② Artistic Masterpieces: Products of Viewers’ Desires
③ Artistic Works Beyond Artists’ Imagination
④ Artworks Not for Artists but for Viewers
⑤ Sports: A Tool for Expressing Oneself?
26. 밑줄 친 her[She]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
I was reminded of our mission earlier this year when
my mother sold her house. Because of my father’s failing
health, my parents recently moved from Florida to
Maryland to live with my elder sister and ① her family.
At my mom’s request, my brothers, sisters, and I sorted
through all ② her belongings. ③ She told us to keep or
discard whatever we pleased. For myself I kept a solitary
piece of china, one of the few remaining plates from the
set my grandfather bought my mother for ④ her wedding.
I can still remember the set in better days ― serving
many a guest on a Sunday afternoon. But its comrades
have all been broken or have disappeared, and this plate
is all I have. It is delicate and faded ― you can no
longer read the pattern name printed on the back. But it
hangs in my dining room as a pleasant reminder of ⑤ her
hospitality.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
27. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
It had long been something of a mystery where, and
on what, the northern fur seals of the eastern Pacific feed
during the winter, (A) when / which they spend off the
coast of North America from California to Alaska. There
is no evidence that they are feeding to any great extent
on sardines, mackerel, or other commercially important
fishes. Presumably four million seals could not compete
with commercial fishermen for the same species without
the fact (B) being / is known. But there is some evidence
on the diet of the fur seals, and it is highly significant.
Their stomachs have yielded the bones of a species of
fish that has never been seen alive. Indeed, not even its
remains (C) has / have been found anywhere except in the
stomachs of seals. Ichthyologists say that this ‘seal fish’
belongs to a group that typically inhabits very deep water,
off the edge of the continental shelf.
* ichthyologist: 어류학자
(A) (B) (C)
① when …… is …… have
② when …… being …… have
③ which …… being …… have
④ which …… being …… has
⑤ which …… is …… has
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Occasionally, there are children who have trouble
understanding that their clothing choice is inappropriate or
even unhealthy. Some children ① follow the suggestion
that sandals may not be the best option for a snowy day.
For those kids, ② experience may be the best teacher.
For example, when Lydia was eight years old, she
insisted on wearing her favorite sandals to school despite
③ warnings that the sidewalks were covered in snow and
slush. Her mom ④ worried that she would arrive at
school with cold, wet feet, but Lydia would not change
her mind. Of course, her mother was right. While Lydia
did have some very uncomfortable toes because they
became soaked and frozen on her way to and from
school, she learned that sometimes fashion isn’t ⑤ worth
the price of serious discomfort.
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentage of women in wage
employment in the non-agricultural sector in 1990 and 2006.
① In Latin America and the Caribbean, women’s waged
non-agricultural employment increased more than five
percentage points between 1990 and 2006. ② In 2006, the
percentage of women’s waged non-agricultural employment
in East Asia and Pacific countries was twice as high as that
of South Asia. ③ In that same year, the percentage of
women’s waged non-agricultural employment in the Middle
East and North Africa was less than that of Sub-Saharan
Africa by ten percentage points. ④ Despite the improvement
between 1990 and 2006, South Asia showed the smallest
increase in the percentage of women in waged non-agricultural
employment. ⑤ Between 1990 and 2006, the increase in the
percentage of women’s waged non-agricultural employment
in Sub-Saharan Africa was larger than that of the Middle
East and North Africa.
30. Zelia Maria Magdalena Nuttall에 관한 다음 글의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
American archaeologist-ethnohistorian Zelia Maria Magdalena
Nuttall was well known especially for her investigations of
pre-Columbian culture and her studies of Mexican peoples
and native Mexican plants. Nuttall was a brilliant archival
researcher and self-trained archaeologist who very early carved
a career for herself by pursuing independent research and
publishing in scholarly journals. Before age 30 she became
a member of several highly prestigious scientific societies
on the basis of her work. She was the winner of three
medals for the exhibits of the results of her archival work
and archaeological research, which she presented in Europe
and the United States. Nuttall was never a part of university
teaching faculty, and indeed there is no indication that she
would have accepted such a position had it been offered.
Early in her career, she was appointed Honorary Assistant
in Mexican Archaeology at the Peabody Museum of
Harvard University, a post she held for forty-seven years.
* archival: 기록의
① 멕시코의 토종 식물에 관한 연구로 잘 알려졌다.
② 독자적인 연구와 학술지 논문 발표를 통해 경력을 쌓았다.
③ 30세가 되기 전에 권위 있는 여러 학회의 회원이 되었다.
④ 기록 작업과 고고학 연구의 결과물 전시로 세 개의 메달을 받았다.
⑤ Harvard 대학의 교수로 47년간 학생들을 가르쳤다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Wood is a material that is widely acknowledged to be
environmentally friendly. It has been welcome as an
alternative material for a long time in building houses
instead of cement or bricks. However, it is not always
easy to of one particular
material such as wood over another. Many species of tree
are now endangered, including mahogany and teak, and
deforestation, particularly in tropical rainforests, has had a
severe impact both on local communities and on native
plants and wildlife. Where wood is harvested and then
transported halfway across the globe, the associated energy
costs are high, causing a negative impact on the
environment. What is more, where wood is treated with
chemicals to improve fire- and pest-resistance, its healthful
properties are compromised.
* mahogany: 마호가니(적갈색 열대산 목재)
① increase the inherent resistance
② favor the chemical properties
③ dominate the natural habitats
④ evaluate the relative merits
⑤ deny the cost advantage
32. So often, we get caught up in the minutiae of our jobs
― tedious annoyances and struggles that may be temporary
roadblocks but feel more like concrete mountains. While
there’s plenty of research that shows that people who
work with the muscles above their neck create all kinds
of stresses for themselves, it’s the people who focus on
the why of their jobs (as opposed to the what and the
how) who can manage the day-to-day problems more
easily. That is, if you can define the purpose of your
career or feel passionate about the mission of your
company, you can much more easily handle the occasional
server maintenance that disrupts your in-box. The flip side
is that if you’re working in any area (or company) that
doesn’t align with your own value, all the little stuff
.
* minutiae: 상세, 세목, 사소한 점
① focuses on the why, belittling the what and the how
② liberates you from the prison of daily routines
③ snowballs into a big ball of daily disasters
④ paves your way to climb up the corporate ladder
⑤ illuminates the true value of what you have to do
33. People knowingly or unknowingly will take too much,
even though it is not for anyone’s collective or long-term
good. As Hardin put it, “Freedom in a commons brings
ruin to all.” Consider a traffic jam on a main road going
into any big city. Each person picks that particular road
for the logical reason that it’s the fastest route. In the
beginning, each additional car does not slow the traffic
down, as there is enough room on the road for the
additional drivers. At some point, however, each car
reduces the average speed, and eventually there are so
many drivers that the traffic slows to a crawl. All the
people seeking to minimize their own driving time add
up to a longer commute for everyone. Doing what’s
rational ,
including you. On a global scale, the same thing can
befall environmental issues such as overfished seas and
rivers, air pollution, and water scarcity. [3점]
① leads to logical consequences for all drivers
② is compatible with the maximum benefit of each driver
③ enhances unselfish interests of each and every commuter
④ is not well executed by the unexpected behaviors of some
drivers
⑤ results in a negative outcome to the collective interest
of all drivers
34. Researchers asked college student volunteers to think
through a fantasy version of an experience (looking
attractive in a pair of high-heeled shoes, winning an essay
contest, or getting an A on a test) and then evaluated the
fantasy’s effect on the subjects and on how things
unfolded in reality. When participants envisioned the most
positive outcome, their energy levels, as measured by
blood pressure, dropped, and they reported having a worse
experience with the actual event than those who had
conjured more realistic or even negative visions. To assess
subjects’ real life experiences, the researchers compared
lists of goals that subjects had set for themselves against
what they had actually accomplished and also relied on
self-reports. “When we fantasize about it ― especially when
you fantasize something very positive ― it’s almost like
you are actually living it,” says one of the study’s
co-authors. That ,
draining the incentive to “get energized to go and get it,”
she explains. Subjects may be better off imagining how to
surmount obstacles instead of ignoring them. [3점]
① prompts you into assessing the real life as it is
② turns a rosy dream into an actual accomplishment
③ renders your goal independent of the fantasy world
④ tricks the mind into thinking the goal has been achieved
⑤ deceives your mind into believing obstacles are insurmountable
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
35. When confronted by a seemingly simple pointing task,
where their desires are put in conflict with outcomes,
chimpanzees find it impossible to exhibit subtle selfserving
cognitive strategies in the immediate presence of
a desired reward. However, such tasks are mastered
. In one
study, chimps were confronted by a simple choice; two
plates holding tasty food items were presented, each with
a different number of treats. If the chimp pointed to the
plate having more treats, it would immediately be given
to a fellow chimp in an adjacent cage, and the frustrated
subject would receive the smaller amount. After hundreds
and hundreds of trials, these chimps could not learn to
withhold pointing to the larger reward. However, these
same chimps had already been taught the symbolic concept
of simple numbers. When those numbers were placed on the
plates as a substitute for the actual rewards, the chimps
promptly learned to point to the smaller numbers first,
thereby obtaining the larger rewards for themselves. [3점]
① as immediate rewards replace delayed ones
② when an alternative symbol system is employed
③ if their desires for the larger rewards are satisfied
④ when material rewards alternate with symbolic ones
⑤ if the value of the number is proportional to the amount
of the reward
[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36. After making a choice, the decision ultimately changes
our estimated pleasure, enhancing the expected pleasure
from the selected option and decreasing the expected
pleasure from the rejected option. If we were not inclined
to (A) the value of our options rapidly so that
they concur with our choices, we would likely second-guess
ourselves to the point of insanity. We would ask ourselves
again and again whether we should have chosen Greece
over Thailand, the toaster over the coffee maker, and Jenny
over Michele. Consistently second-guessing ourselves would
interfere with our daily functioning and promote a negative
effect. We would feel anxious and confused, regretful and
sad. Have we done the right thing? Should we change our
mind? These thoughts would result in a permanent halt.
We would find ourselves ― literally ― stuck, overcome by
(B) and unable to move forward. On the other
hand, reevaluating our alternatives after making a decision
increases our commitment to the action taken and keeps us
moving forward. [3점]
(A) (B)
① disregard …… indecision
② disregard …… decision
③ disclose …… decision
④ update …… prejudice
⑤ update …… indecision
37. Traditionally we have assessed mathematics ability based
on the number of correct answers on a page full of
computational problems. Learning and memorizing facts,
therefore, was the key component to the mathematics
instructional program. Recently, (A) , many teachers
have started placing a greater emphasis on mathematical
understanding, problem solving, hands-on experiences, and
collaborative work. This change in the instructional
program can be attributed to well-informed teachers and the
work of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Now teachers should realize that their students will be
using mathematics in a world where calculators, computers,
and other forms of technology are readily available.
Therefore, the application of mathematics, rather than mere
fact acquisition, is what will be expected of them in the
workplace and in life, and (B) mathematics
instruction should mirror this real life application.
(A) (B)
① however …… otherwise
② however …… nonetheless
③ however …… consequently
④ moreover …… accordingly
⑤ moreover …… similarly
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Most of the words we use and the meanings we think
about are a combination of simpler ideas.
(A) Some of them are specialized for sitting at certain high
places, like bar stools. If you learned about a culture
in which a certain type of chair was used only for the
purpose of sitting while waiting for a bus, you might
think this is odd but would have no difficulty
understanding it.
(B) Consider a chair. Before you can have an idea of a
chair, you need to understand that there exist in the
world certain functional objects. Some of these objects
support human activity, in this case, sitting.
(C) The combination of the concepts chair and waiting for
bus allows you to create the new complex concept
chair used while waiting for bus. But the basic concept
of chair is built out of the simpler ideas that we take
for granted: object, furniture, sitting.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
The experimenter then changed the context so that the
participants had to do a subtly different task.
By changing the focus or context of a task, we can get
renewed energy even when we feel that we are completely
out of energy. To demonstrate this, a psychologist asked
people to take part in what she called ‘semi-free tasks’. The
tasks included drawing, repeatedly writing ‘ababababababab...’,
or reading a short poem. ( ① ) The participants were
asked to do these tasks until they felt exhausted. ( ② )
Those drawing were asked to redraw their last picture to
demonstrate how quickly they could draw. ( ③ ) Those
writing ‘abab’ were asked to sign their name and address.
( ④ ) In this new context their fatigue disappeared. ( ⑤ )
This phenomenon of creating a second wind can be seen in
action at airports where security officers rotate around different
stations to stop routine-induced fatigue from settling in.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
During the 1970s, researchers began to suggest that
human vulnerability to hazards, rather than the hazards
themselves, was central to understanding the importance
of hazards, particularly when considering that a city is a
geographical focus for large populations. Further, it was
reported that human and material losses from disasters
had increased during the 20th century. This happened at
a time when cities in the developing world were
growing at unprecedented rates, bringing together large
populations of low income urban residents, often on
hazardous spontaneous settlements which made them far
more vulnerable to natural and human-induced hazards.
It is precisely this issue of vulnerability on which a
number of social scientists focused, arguing that although
floods, landslides and earthquakes are natural processes,
the disasters that can be associated with them are not a
result of natural processes, but of human vulnerability.
󰀻
With the dramatic growth of (A) in developing
countries, environmental hazards could turn into disasters
for those who are unable to (B) their impacts.
(A) (B)
① population …… magnify
② economy …… figure out
③ economy …… cope with
④ cities …… cope with
⑤ cities …… magnify
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
If you don’t get the kind of information failure
provides, you’ll end up with unrealistic expectations for
yourself, explains a psychologist. You could wind up in
a position where failure, which has gathered under cover
of darkness, reveals itself all at once.
We should hope, then, for exposure to failure, early
and often. The sociologist Glen Elder proposed that
there is a sensitive period for growth ― late teens
through early 30s ― during which failures are most
beneficial. Such a pattern seems to promote the trait
sometimes called equanimity. We learn that trauma is
survivable, so we don’t plunge too deeply following
setbacks. Nor, conversely, do we soar too high on our
successes. Some businesses in Silicon Valley and on
Wall Street make a point of hiring ex-pro athletes to
their staffs. It’s not just that their high profile draws
business. It’s because athletes are good at recovering
from their failures. “We needed people who could
perform and not get emotionally attached to losses,” a
Chicago oil trader told the New York Times, explaining
why the firm likes athletes on the trading floor,
particularly in ugly economic times like these. The
image is of a rider easy in the saddle. Nothing can so
surprise her ― either for good or ill ― that she’ll be
knocked off.
One way to help keep life’s slings and arrows from
knocking you off course is to ensure your life is
, says Stephen Berglas, a California
psychologist and personal coach. That way, a setback in
any one area won’t mean in your mind that you’re a
failure categorically. Call it spreading your risk across
your emotional portfolio ― or adding another leg to the
furniture for balance, says Berglas.
* equanimity: 마음의 평정
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Do Not Let Failure Fail You
② Recipe for Attaining Physical Stability
③ Physical Toughness and Mental Flexibility
④ How to Survive Emotional Unrest in Sports
⑤ Failure as an Enemy of Emotional Calmness
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① illusionary ② predictable
③ convergent ④ straightforward
⑤ multidimensional
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
To be creative problem solvers, people must learn to
approach complexity with a certain naive simplicity. And
by letting their thinking become more free, they can
improve their chances of discovering new unencumbered
perceptions of old problems or entirely new creations.
For this, they can mentally play with the ideas in a
childlike manner. Here is an example story. In a small
Moravian village at the time of the old Austrian empire,
an inspector from the Ministry of Education arrived one
day to visit the schoolroom. It was part of (a) his duty
to make such periodic inspections of the schools.
* unencumbered: 방해받지 않는
(B)
At the end of the hour, after he had observed the
class, he stood up and said: “I am glad to see that you
children are doing well in your studies. I am satisfied
with your progress. Therefore, before I go, there is one
question I would like to ask. How many hairs does a
horse have?” Very quickly one little nine-year-old boy
raised his hand, to the astonishment of the teacher and
the visitor. (b) He stood up and said, “The horse has
3,571,962 hairs.” The inspector wonderingly asked, “And
how do you know that this is the right number?” The
boy replied, “If you do not believe me, you could count
them yourself.”
(C)
It was a year later, and the inspector was back again
at the village school for his annual visit. As the teacher
was walking along the aisle with (c) him to the door, he
stopped and said, “By the way, Mr. Inspector, how did
your colleagues like the story of the horse and the
number of his hairs?” The inspector slapped the teacher
on the back. “Oh yes,” he said, “you know, I was
really very anxious to tell that story ― and a fine story
it was ― but you see, I wasn’t able for the life of me
to remember the number of hairs.”
(D)
The inspector broke into loud laughter, thoroughly
enjoying the boy’s remark. As the teacher escorted (d) him
along the aisle to the door, still laughing heartily, he
said: “What an amusing story! I must tell this story to
my colleagues when I return to Vienna. I can already see
how they will take it; they enjoy nothing better than a
good joke.” And with that, he took (e) his leave.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (C) － (D)
② (B) － (D) － (C)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 inspector에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Moravia에 있는 한 학교를 방문했다.
② 학생들의 학업 향상에 만족한다고 말했다.
③ 말의 털이 몇 개인지 기억할 수 없었다고 말했다.
④ 소년의 대답이 재미있었지만 억지로 웃음을 참았다.
⑤ Vienna에 가서 동료들에게 이 이야기를 들려주겠다고 말했다.

1번부터 22번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Right. We need to get a new fridge.
② Oh! Then I’ll go buy some right now.
③ Sure. Let me show you how to cook them.
④ Wow! This sandwich tastes really good.
⑤ Yeah. This is a good place for a picnic.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No. You don’t have to pay the late fee.
② Right. I’ll pay now and get the book later.
③ It’s my turn. So you have to wait until I’m done.
④ Okay. I’ll put your name on it, so you’ll be the next.
⑤ Why not? Wait here and I’ll go find the book for you.
3. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It’s hard to endure the loss of a cherished puppy.
② You shouldn’t have taken your eyes off the road.
③ You should break the habit of being late all the time.
④ Don’t worry. You can do it if you put your mind to it.
⑤ What a coincidence! I was about to drop by your house.
4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 주차 관리 요원을 모집하려고
② 요가 센터 개장을 홍보하려고
③ 주차장 확장 공사를 안내하려고
④ 체육 시설 안전 점검을 촉구하려고
⑤ 새로운 요가 프로그램을 소개하려고
5. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 배낚시 전 확인해야 할 안전 장비
② 배낚시를 즐기는 다양한 방법
③ 선상 화재의 주된 원인
④ 연령에 따른 구명조끼의 종류
⑤ 배낚시 도구의 효과적인 관리 요령
6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 컴퓨터 구매 시 고려 사항
② 컴퓨터 보안 프로그램의 필요성
③ 컴퓨터 내부 먼지 제거의 중요성
④ 컴퓨터 전용 청소 도구의 사용법
⑤ 컴퓨터 사용 시간과 건강 간의 관계
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장난감의 과도한 사용은 학습을 방해한다.
② 장난감의 위생 상태를 확인할 필요가 있다.
③ 장난감 총 사용 시 안전사고에 유의해야 한다.
④ 장난감 종류에 따라 연령 제한을 두어야 한다.
⑤ 장난감 총은 아이들에게 부정적인 영향을 미친다.
8. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 서점 직원 － 고객 ② 연극 연출가 － 배우
③ 동화 작가 － 독자 ④ 도서관 사서 － 학생
⑤ 출판사 편집장 － 삽화가
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 수업 참관하기
② 만화 그려 주기
③ 팸플릿 복사하기
④ 읽기 자료 찾아 주기
⑤ 현장 학습 일정표 만들기
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2
8
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to participate in the meeting to talk about the matter
② to install a device in the car to record accidents
③ to repair the damaged car before she gets back
④ to prepare for a business trip with her customer
⑤ to watch the security video to find who hit the car
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 head chef에 지원하지 못하는 이유를
고르시오.
① 다음 주에 근무를 시작해야 해서
② 기숙사 생활을 해야 해서
③ 호텔에서의 요리사 경력이 부족해서
④ 요리 대회 수상 실적이 없어서
⑤ 프랑스어를 못해서
13. 대화를 듣고, 예술 작품을 이해하는 데 도움이 되는 것으로
두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 작품의 주제 ② 예술가의 개인 정보
③ 작품의 역사적 배경 ④ 작품에 대한 전문가의 견해
⑤ 작품에 사용된 재료
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $500 ② $600 ③ $700 ④ $1,000 ⑤ $1,200
15. Amazing Art Lovers에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 43년의 역사를 가진 동아리이다.
② 지난 10년 동안 지역 사회에서 자원 봉사를 해 왔다.
③ 일주일 전에, 공장 벽에 그림을 그려 달라고 요청받았다.
④ 전공에 관계없이 신입 회원을 찾고 있다.
⑤ 전화번호가 웹사이트에 게시되어 있다.
16. sausage tree에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① 비가 연중 내리는 곳에서 늘 푸르다.
② 빨간색 꽃이 해질 녘에 핀다.
③ 꽃은 수분이 이루어지면 그다음 날 아침에 떨어진다.
④ 열매는 소시지를 닮았고 먹을 수 있다.
⑤ 지역민들은 악령을 쫓아내기 위해 열매를 사용한다.
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 제품을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
18. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① You have to renew your driver’s license.
② I’ll let you take the midterm a second time.
③ Then you should easily pass the test this time.
④ I don’t think memorizing is the best way to study.
⑤ No wonder you’re curious about your test results.
19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① And I’ll ask my teacher if that is permitted.
② Then I should garden to relieve my stress.
③ I can do better if I conquer my indecision.
④ I promise to help you more in the garden.
⑤ So I should work on it a little every day.
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Paul이 Jennifer에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Paul:
① Would you fax me the document right away?
② Will you copy the document for the meeting?
③ If you don’t hurry, you’ll miss your flight.
④ I have no choice but to visit your office.
⑤ Please check whether you got my fax.
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① reasons for extreme competition among animals for food
② how repeated changes in nature affect animal behavior
③ drawbacks to animals’ adaptation to nature
④ how to preserve endangered wildlife effectively
⑤ types of threats from serious environmental changes
22. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① butterflies ② moths ③ frogs
④ birds ⑤ fish
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3
8
23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
In our efforts to be the good child, the uncomplaining
employee, or the cooperative patient, many of us fall into the
trap of trying to please people by going along with whatever
they want us to do. At times, we lose track of our own
boundaries and needs, and the cost of this could be our life,
both symbolically and literally. When we are unable to set
healthy limits, it causes distress in our relationships. But when
we learn to say no to what we don’t feel like doing in order to
say yes to our true self, we feel empowered, and our
relationships with others improve. So don’t be afraid to say
no. Try to catch yourself in the moment and use your true
voice to say what you really want to say.
① 난관을 극복할 때 성취감이 생긴다.
② 항상 타인의 입장을 먼저 고려해야 한다.
③ 자신이 원하지 않는 일은 거절할 필요가 있다.
④ 자신의 의견을 고집하면 대인 관계가 악화된다.
⑤ 제안을 승낙하기 전에는 그 의도를 파악해야 한다.
24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
In order to successfully release himself from the control of
his parents, a child must be secure in his parents’ power, as
represented by their loving authority. The more effectively they
communicate that authority, the more secure the child feels, and
the better able he is to move away from them toward a life of his
own. During this lengthy process, whenever he feels threatened,
he turns back toward the safety of his parents’ love and
authority. In other words, it is impossible for a child to
successfully release himself unless he knows exactly where his
parents stand, both literally and figuratively. That requires, of
course, that his parents know where they themselves stand. If
they don’t know where they stand ― if, in other words, they are
insecure in their authority ― they cannot communicate security
to their child, and he cannot move successfully away from
them. Under the circumstances, he will become clingy, or
disobedient, or both.
① necessity of parental intervention in ensuring children’s
safety
② roles of parental authority in children’s social skills
development
③ consequences of offering parental supervision for children’s
independence
④ requirements for preventing children from being disobedient
to their parents
⑤ importance of communicating parental authority to children
for their independence
25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The names of pitches are associated with particular
frequency values. Our current system is called A440 because
the note we call ‘A’ that is in the middle of the piano keyboard
has been fixed to have a frequency of 440 Hz. This is entirely
arbitrary. We could fix ‘A’ at any frequency, such as 439 or
424; different standards were used in the time of Mozart than
today. Some people claim that the precise frequencies affect
the overall sound of a musical piece and the sound of
instruments. Led Zeppelin, a band popular in the 70s, often
tuned their instruments away from the modern A440 standard
to give their music an uncommon sound, and perhaps to link it
with the European children’s folk songs that inspired many of
their compositions. Many purists insist on hearing baroque
music on period instruments, both because the instruments
have a different sound and because they are designed to play
the music in its original tuning standard, something that
purists deem important.
① Should ‘A’ Always Be Tuned at 440 Hz?
② Arbitrary Tuning: A New Trend in Music
③ How to Correctly Measure Frequency Values
④ How Do Musicians Detect Pitch Differences?
⑤ Unstable Pitches: A Common Thread in Music
26. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
A friend of mine was sitting in the Miami airport reading a
magazine while she waited to catch a plane to New York. Her
attention was distracted by a rough, noisy quarrel taking place
at the ticket counter. “But I must get to New York today!”
① an angry lady hotly told the clerk. “I’m sorry, ma’am, but
there are no more seats available,” came the reply. “But my
eight-year-old daughter is on that plane. ② I can’t let her fly
into New York City all by herself,” she cried. “Sorry, lady. The
flight is full,” came the same answer. My friend had been
watching and listening to the woman’s woeful story, and her
heart was touched with compassion for ③ the distressed mother.
She walked over to the ticket agent and offered to take a later
flight, if it meant the woman could use ④ her ticket to travel to
New York with her daughter. The agent welcomed my friend’s
solution and quickly issued a revalidated ticket to ⑤ the woman,
and then arranged for another flight for my friend.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4
8
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Oxygen is what it is all about. Ironically, the stuff that gives
us life eventually kills it. The ultimate life force lies in tiny
cellular factories of energy, called mitochondria, ① that burn
nearly all the oxygen we breathe in. But breathing has a price.
The combustion of oxygen that keeps us alive and active
② sending out by-products called oxygen free radicals. They
have Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde characteristics. On the one
hand, they help guarantee our survival. For example, when the
body mobilizes ③ to fight off infectious agents, it generates a
burst of free radicals to destroy the invaders very efficiently.
On the other hand, free radicals move ④ uncontrollably
through the body, attacking cells, rusting their proteins,
piercing their membranes and corrupting their genetic code
until the cells become dysfunctional and sometimes give up
and die. These fierce radicals, ⑤ built into life as both
protectors and avengers, are potent agents of aging.
* oxygen free radical: 활성 산소
** membrane: (해부학) 얇은 막
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
When people started to plant stored seed stock deliberately,
they also began protecting their plants. This changed the
evolutionary ① pressure that these food plants experienced, as
they no longer had to survive in a natural environment.
Instead, people created a new environment for them, and
selected for other characteristics than nature previously had.
Seeds recovered at archaeological sites clearly show that
farmers selected for larger seeds and ② thinner seed coats.
Thick seed coats are often ③ essential for seeds to survive in
a natural environment because the seeds of many wild plants
remain dormant for months until winter is over and rain sets
in. But under human management thick seed coats are
unnecessary, as farmers ④ evade responsibility for storing
seeds away from moisture and predators. In fact, seeds with
thinner coats were ⑤ preferred as they are easier to eat or
process into flour, and they allow seedlings to sprout more
quickly when sown.
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the Canadian volunteer rates and
average annual hours of seven age groups in 2007. ① In these
groups, the volunteer rates ranged from 29% to 58%, and the
Canadian average rate was 46%. ② The average annual hours
increased with age except for the group aged between 25 and
34, which volunteered an average of 133 hours. ③ The 15-24
age group showed the highest volunteer rate but the second
fewest average annual hours. ④ The 35-44 age group had
fewer average annual hours than the 45-54 age group, while
the 55-64 and 65-74 age groups showed the same average
annual hours. ⑤ Despite their lowest rate of volunteering,
seniors aged 75 and older gave more hours on average than
any other age group.
30. Fourier에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier was a French mathematician
and physicist. When he was eight years old, his father died, and
less than a year after this tragedy, his mother passed away,
leaving him an orphan. A charitable lady helped him attend a
local military school. He wanted to become an officer but was
not allowed to because he was the son of a tailor. In 1795, he
became a teacher at the École Normale in Paris. During the
post-Revolution frenzy, he spoke out against the use of the
guillotine, for which he almost lost his life. When Napoleon
invaded Egypt in 1798, Fourier and other scholars accompanied
the expedition. Having returned to France, Fourier began his
research on heat conduction. His mathematical theory of heat
conduction earned him lasting fame. During his stay in Egypt he
contracted a strange illness that confined him to well-heated
rooms for the rest of his life. On May 16, 1830, Fourier died in
Paris.
* guillotine: 단두대
① 프랑스의 수학자이자 물리학자였다.
② 재단사의 아들이라는 이유로 장교가 되지 못했다.
③ 단두대 사용에 반대하다가 목숨을 잃을 뻔했다.
④ 열전도에 관한 수학 이론으로 명성을 얻었다.
⑤ 이집트에서 프랑스로 돌아온 후 이상한 병에 걸렸다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5
8
[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Sometimes all the outcomes customers are trying to achieve
in one area have a negative effect on other outcomes. This is
very common when companies are busy listening to the ‘voice
of the customer.’ Traveling salespeople, for example, may say
they want a smaller cell phone, but they may not have thought
about how hard that tiny phone will be to use. Carpenters may
request a lightweight circular saw without thinking about the
fact that it will no longer have the power to get through some of
the more difficult jobs. When customers make requests for new
product features, they are usually focused on solving just one
problem and are not thinking of how their requested solution
will .
In this situation, customers request new features but reject the
resulting product when they realize the ramifications of their
suggestions ― the added feature turns out to be worthless
because of the problems it causes.
* ramification: 파생된 문제
① impact other product or service functions
② delay the introduction of innovative products
③ induce other customers to make additional requests
④ bring about excessive competition among companies
⑤ discourage companies from listening to customers’ voices
32. The success of human beings depends crucially on numbers
and connections. A few hundred people cannot sustain a
sophisticated technology. Recall that Australia was colonized
45,000 years ago by pioneers spreading east from Africa along
the shore of Asia. The vanguard of such a migration must have
been small in number and must have traveled comparatively
light. The chances are they had only a sample of the
technology available to their relatives back at the Red Sea
crossing. This may explain why Australian aboriginal
technology, although it developed and elaborated steadily over
the ensuing millennia, was lacking in so many features of the
Old World ― elastic weapons, for example, such as bows and
catapults, were unknown, as were ovens. It was not that they
were ‘primitive’ or that they had mentally regressed; it was
that they
and did not have a dense enough population and therefore a
large enough collective brain to develop them much further. [3점]
* catapult: 투석기
① were too tightly connected to develop new technologies
② focused on developing and elaborating elastic weapons
③ had arrived with only a subset of technologies
④ inherited none of their relatives’ technologies in Africa
⑤ failed to transfer their technical insights to the Old World
33. Policymaking is seen to be more objective when experts
play a large role in the creation and implementation of the
policy, and when utilitarian rationality is the dominant value
that guides policy. Through the use of the scientific method to
determine the facts of any given policy situation, the power of
social constructions is supposedly diminished, and solutions to
social problems are discovered in an objective way. This
process creates an illusion of neutrality and implies a
transcendence of the pitfalls and inequalities commonly
associated with policymaking. From this perspective, scientists
and professionals emerge as the appropriate experts to be
consulted in policymaking, while local citizen input and
knowledge is often viewed as unnecessary. Scientific and
professional policy design does not necessarily escape the
pitfalls of degenerative politics. Scientific and professional
expertise often relies on a particular type of knowledge that is
limited to utility and rationality considerations. This approach
to policy typically does not consider values and cultural factors
that cannot be measured empirically. Scientifically designed
policies can serve interests that run counter to the public
interest. They . [3점]
* transcendence: 초월
① use empirically proven theories to reflect locals’ input
② do stress cultural values rather than utilitarian ones
③ may be free from the inequalities of policymaking
④ can reinforce unequal and unjust relationships
⑤ reveal objective solutions to social problems
34. Like many errors and biases that seem irrational on the
surface, auditory looming turns out, on closer examination, to
be pretty smart. Animals like rhesus monkeys have evolved
the same bias. This intentional error functions as an advance
warning system, manned by the self-protection subself,
providing individuals with a margin of safety when they are
confronted with potentially dangerous approaching objects.
If you spot a rhinoceros or hear an avalanche speeding
toward you, auditory looming will motivate you to jump
out of the way now rather than wait until the last second.
The evolutionary benefits of immediately getting out of the
way of approaching dangers were so strong that natural
selection endowed us ― and other mammals ― with brains
that . Although
this kind of bias might inhibit economically rational
judgment in laboratory tasks, it leads us to behave in a
deeply rational manner in the real world. Being accurate is not
always smart. [3점]
* avalanche: 눈사태
① intentionally see and hear the world inaccurately
② are geared to evaluate aural information precisely
③ deliberately make rational yet ineffective decisions
④ prompt us to overlook dangers without thinking rationally
⑤ accurately detect, but irrationally ignore, approaching dangers
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6
8
35. Mathematics will attract those it can attract, but it will do
nothing to overcome resistance to science. Science is universal
in principle but in practice it speaks to very few. Mathematics
may be considered a communication skill of the highest type,
frictionless so to speak; and at the opposite pole from
mathematics, the fruits of science show the practical benefits of
science without the use of words. But those fruits are
ambivalent. Science as science does not speak; ideally,
all scientific concepts are mathematized when scientists
communicate with one another, and when science displays its
products to non-scientists it need not, and indeed is not able to,
resort to salesmanship. When science speaks to others, it is no
longer science, and the scientist becomes or has to hire a
publicist who dilutes the exactness of mathematics. In doing
so, the scientist reverses his drive toward mathematical
exactness in favor of rhetorical vagueness and metaphor, thus
. [3점]
① degrading his ability to use the scientific language needed
for good salesmanship
② surmounting the barrier to science by associating science
with mathematics
③ inevitably making others who are unskillful in mathematics
hostile to science
④ neglecting his duty of bridging the gap between science
and the public
⑤ violating the code of intellectual conduct that defines him
as a scientist
[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36. F. Scott Fitzgerald thought that the test of first-rate
intelligence was the ability to hold two opposed ideas in mind
at the same time and still function. The eons shaped our brains
in the (A) direction. Confirmation bias is a term for the
way the mind systematically avoids confronting contradiction.
It does this by overvaluing evidence that confirms what we
already think or feel and undervaluing or simply disregarding
evidence that refutes it. Testimony from members of the Crow
tribe about the destruction of their culture provides an extreme
and tragic example of this. A man named Plenty Coups
reported that “when the buffalo went away, the hearts of my
people fell to the ground and they could not lift them up again.
After this nothing happened.” He was not alone in describing
the depth of despair as the end of history. “Nothing happened
after that,” another Crow warrior said. “We just lived.” The
emotion was so strong that the brain (B) evidence of the
continued existence of normal, everyday life that might have
eased it. [3점]
* eon: 무한히 긴 시대, 영겁
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① opposite …… retained ② opposite …… rejected
③ wrong …… validated ④ same …… falsified
⑤ same …… overlooked
37. Oil and gas resources are not likely to be impacted by
climate change because they result from a process that takes
millions of years and are geologically trapped. (A) ,
climate change may not only force the shutting down of oiland
gas-producing areas, but increase the possibility of
exploration in areas of the Arctic through the reduction in ice
cover. Thus, while climate change may not impact these
resources, oil and gas reserves and known or potential
resources could be affected by new climate conditions, since
climate change may affect access to these resources. In
Siberia, (B) , the actual exploration challenge is the
time required to access, produce, and deliver oil under extreme
environmental conditions, where temperatures in January
range from —20℃ to —35℃. Warming may ease extreme
environmental conditions, expanding the production frontier.
(A) (B)
① On the other hand …… however
② On the other hand …… for instance
③ As a result …… for instance
④ As a result …… however
⑤ In other words …… therefore
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
We tend to perceive the door of a classroom as
rectangular no matter from which angle it is viewed.
Actually, the rectangular door of a classroom projects a
rectangular image on our retina only when it is viewed
directly from the front.
(A) Slowly the trapezoid becomes thinner and thinner, and all
that is projected on the retina is a vertical line, which is
the thickness of the door. These changes we can observe
and distinguish, but we do not accept them.
(B) Similarly, a round coin is seen as round even when
viewed from an angle at which, objectively, it should
appear elliptical. In the same way, we see car wheels as
round, even though the retinal image is oval when viewed
from an angle other than directly from the front.
(C) At other angles, the image will be seen as a trapezoid.
The edge of the door towards us looks wider than the
edge hinged with the frame.
* trapezoid: 사다리꼴 ** elliptical: 타원형의
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7
8
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
So, when someone is threatening to go to war, or trying to
convince us and mounting a huge public relations campaign
to justify it, the news media have a responsibility to
question everything.
It’s important that the media provide us with diverse and
opposing views, so we can choose the best available options.
Let’s take the example of going to war. ( ① ) War should be
a last resort, obviously, undertaken when all other options
have failed. ( ② ) They should be providing the most intense
scrutiny on our behalf, so the public can see the other side of
things. ( ③ ) Otherwise, we may be drawn into unnecessary
wars, or wars fought for reasons other than those presented
by governments and generals. ( ④ ) Most of the time, the
media fail to perform this crucial role. ( ⑤ ) Even the large,
so-called ‘liberal’ American media have admitted that they
have not always been watchdogs for the public interest, and
that their own coverage on some major issues “looks
strikingly one-sided at times.”
* scrutiny: 면밀한 조사
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Low-balling describes the technique where two
individuals arrive at an agreement and then one increases
the cost to be incurred by the other. For example, after the
consumer has agreed to purchase a car for $8,000, the
salesperson begins to add on $100 for tax and $200 for
tires. These additional costs might be thought of as a
metaphorical ‘low ball’ that the salesperson throws the
consumer. One explanation for the effectiveness of
low-balling is in terms of self-perception theory. When the
consumer agrees to purchase the product under the original
terms, that behavior might be used by the consumer to
infer his sincere interest in the product. This inferred
sincere interest in the product may enable him to endure
the increased cost. An alternative explanation is in terms
of impression management theory. If the consumer were
to withdraw from the deal after the ‘slight’ change in the
terms of agreement, he might foster the rather undesirable
impression of being an irresponsible consumer unaware of
these necessary charges.
󰀻
Low-balling is effective in sales contexts because the
consumer, by not withdrawing from the deal, tends to
(A) his purchase decision or tries to save (B) .
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① justify …… time ② justify …… face
③ cherish …… time ④ modify …… face
⑤ modify …… trouble
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
There is a difference between getting what you want and
getting what you think you want. Technology gives us more
and more of what we think we want. These days, looking at
sociable robots and digitized friends, one might assume that
what we want is to be always in touch and never alone, no
matter who or what we are in touch with. One might assume
that what we want is plenty of weak ties, the informal
networks that underpin online acquaintanceship. But if we
pay attention to the real consequences of what we think we
want, we may discover what we really want. We may want
some stillness and solitude. As an American writer once put
it, we may want to live less ‘thickly’ and wait for more
infrequent but meaningful . As we
put in our many hours of typing ― with all fingers or just
thumbs ― we may discover that we miss the human voice.
We may decide that it is fine to play chess with a robot, but
that robots are unfit for any conversation about family or
friends. A robot might have needs, but to understand desire,
one needs language and flesh. We may decide that for these
conversations, we must have a person who knows, firsthand,
what it means to be born, to have parents and a family, to
wish for love and perhaps children, and to anticipate death.
And, of course, we must not let the virtual take us away from
the real world that doesn’t go away with a power outage.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Plug In and Log On: Farewell to Loneliness
② Ethical Issues in the Online Community
③ Humans and Robots: Friends or Foes?
④ Connected yet Detached in Virtuality
⑤ Explore the Net, Go Beyond Reality
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① adventurous endeavors
② technological outbursts
③ face-to-face encounters
④ dialogs with social robots
⑤ supernatural interventions
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8
8
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
How much space do you need to be happy? Part of the
American story is that bigger is better, and with cheap credit
and tax breaks for home buyers, it’s tempting to stretch one’s
finances to build or buy a larger house. My grandpa Otto
chose a different path. (a) He didn’t want to find himself
working longer and longer hours just to pay for more space
and the stuff to fill it. He grew up in a farming community
and within a very large family, so living simply was integral
to his life philosophy.
(B)
Yet my grandpa loved his little home and was content with
what he had. Even though the house was small, it didn’t feel
cramped. As my dad said, “Everyone was happy and content.
The size of the house didn’t matter.” My grandpa taught me
that living a simple life isn’t about self-deprivation. Instead,
it’s about giving yourself the time, freedom, and money to
pursue your dreams. In many ways, I’ve modeled my life after
that of my grandpa. I learned from (b) him that simplicity
isn’t about austerity. It’s a revolution in personal growth.
(C)
In the 1950s, when my dad was a little boy, my grandpa
built a 600-square-foot cottage. (c) He put the twenty-bythirty-
foot structure on a small plot of land in Pleasant Hill.
Dad remarked, “Reusing and recycling was a necessity. In
essence, (d) he was recycling before it became ‘cool.’”
Grandpa got most of the materials for his little house from
the Oakland docks, where he was working. It took four years
to build the small cottage, and when they moved in, the roof
wasn’t even on!
(D)
My dad recalled looking up at the stars in the roofless
house as a twelve-year-old kid before falling asleep. Dad
didn’t mind living in an unfinished house. (e) He described
Pleasant Hill as “open and private. It felt like all the homes
were on ten acres.” Over the years, my dad and grandpa
noticed dramatic changes in their community. Each year
more farmland was devoured to build strip malls and
neighborhoods with larger homes. As real estate prices rose,
many of their neighbors sold their homes and lots. Soon my
grandpa had the only small house on the block, surrounded
by a sea of homes four times the size of his dwelling.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 grandpa에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 농촌 사회의 대가족 속에서 성장했다.
② 여러 가지 면에서 필자의 삶의 모델이 되었다.
③ 1950년대에 600제곱 피트의 집을 지었다.
④ 집을 짓는 데 필요한 대부분의 자재를 부두에서 구했다.
⑤ 지역 사회의 급격한 변화를 알아차리지 못했다.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 15
번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 들
려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
①　I know. It’s not easy to make good spaghetti.
②　Exactly. I’ll do something to reduce food waste.
③　Yes. Making a shopping list helps to save money.
④　Not at all. I’m pretty sure it won’t last for a week.
⑤　You’re right. We should have family meals more often.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll help you find an interesting topic.
② I’m glad that you came to my art presentation.
③ You’ll learn a lot about art through the presentation.
④ Don’t worry. Your presentation was not boring at all.
⑤ I have no idea why the presentation schedule was changed.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르
시오.
① 새로운 헬스 기구의 사용법을 설명하려고
② 교내 헬스장에서 지켜야 할 예절을 강조하려고
③ 체력 증진을 위한 교내 헬스장 이용을 독려하려고
④ 헬스장 이용 시 준비 운동을 할 것을 당부하려고
⑤ 교내 헬스장 보수 공사 일정을 공지하려고
4. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르
시오.
①　휴대용 컴퓨터의 손상 방지책
②　휴대용 컴퓨터 보안 관리의 필요성
③　휴대용 컴퓨터의 주변 기기 관리 요령
④　휴대용 컴퓨터 사용 증가로 인한 문제점
⑤　휴대용 컴퓨터 종류에 따른 용도와 특징
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①　학교 도서관의 시설 확충이 시급하다.
②　학생들의 도서관 이용을 장려해야 한다.
③　학교 도서관에 최신 도서를 구비해야 한다.
④　다양한 분야의 책을 균형 있게 읽어야 한다.
⑤　올바른 정보 습득을 위한 교육을 강화해야 한다.
6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 학생 - 미술 교사 ② 미술 치료사 - 학부모
③ 기자 - 미술 평론가 ④ 미술 용품점 주인 - 화가
⑤ 관람객 - 미술관 직원
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 해야 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①　샘플 상품 요청하기 ②　계약 조건 확인하기
③　시장 수요 조사하기 ④　출장 일정 점검하기
⑤　출장 보고서 작성하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 이사 가려는 이유를 고르시오.
①　직장을 옮겨서 ②　침실이 더 많이 필요해서
③　주차 공간이 협소해서 ④　난방비가 많이 나와서
⑤　자녀의 통학 거리가 멀어서
9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $800 ② $950 ③ $1,300 ④ $1,450 ⑤ $2,150
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 프로그램을
고르시오.
White Beach Aquarium: Daily Programs
Programs Time Age
Limits Price
① Penguin Feedings 2:30 p.m. None $20
② Meet the Dolphins 10:45 a.m. 7 and up $75
③ Sea Life Safari 2:30 p.m. 7 and up $75
④ Diving Class 10:45 a.m. 13 and up $50
⑤ Fun with Fur Seals 3:15 p.m. 13 and up $30
영어 영역 2
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
2 8
12. 2014 Photography Seminar에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 6월 1일부터 6일 동안 열리는 행사이다.
② 100명이 넘는 강사가 다양한 전문 분야를 다룰 예정이다.
③ 최신 사진 장비에 대한 설명이 있을 것이다.
④ 전화와 이메일을 통해 예약이 가능하다.
⑤ 사진 전공 학생에게는 할인 혜택이 주어진다.
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
①　No thanks. We have cancelled the bazaar.
②　Yes, the bazaar was successful thanks to you.
③　Sorry, but I’m too busy to volunteer at the bazaar.
④　Please help me become the director of the school bazaar.
⑤　It’ll be nice of you to ask other teachers for participation.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
①　I’m sorry to hear you have so much stress.
②　It must be difficult to work as an office worker.
③　It’s impressive that you keep challenging yourself.
④　I don’t know why you want to start a new business.
⑤　You need to spend less money at a fancy restaurant.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Benny가 운전자에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Benny: Excuse me.
① I’m looking for the entrance to the mall.
②　I’ve been waiting to take this parking space.
③ Please help me carry this grocery to my car.
④ You should turn off your blinkers after parking.
⑤ I’m afraid there’s something wrong with your tire.
[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
①　factors causing movie mistakes
②　expansion of the movie industry
③　using movies for learning history
④　strategies for casting good actors
⑤　history of commercial film-making
17. 영화 제작과 관련하여 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 예산 ② 촬영지 ③ 의상
④ 특수 효과 ⑤ 소품
이제 듣기ㆍ말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지
의 지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear C&G Waste Services,
Westwood High School is currently establishing a paper
recycling program. With the help of students and staff,
we aim to significantly reduce the amount of paper that
goes into the trash by recycling paper. We currently have
a dumpster that will hold the paper recycling, but we
need containers for individual classrooms to meet our
goal. We would like to request 20 containers. We also
need 2,000 clear trash bags in order to allow students
and staff to get the paper to the recycle dumpster. So,
we are asking your company if it will donate these items
so that we may succeed in conserving our natural
resources. Please contact me if you have any questions.
We look forward to establishing a partnership with C&G
Waste Services. We know that these types of
partnerships help us give back to the community and
enhance actions our students can take towards helping
the environment.
Sincerely,
Anna Wilson
① 빈번한 쓰레기 미수거에 대해 항의하려고
② 구입한 물품의 배송 지연에 대해 문의하려고
③ 재활용 쓰레기 수거 일정의 변경을 요청하려고
④ 지역 환경 보호 운동을 선도한 것에 대해 감사하려고
⑤ 종이 재활용 프로그램 운영에 필요한 물품 기부를 부탁하려고
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Mr. Aryeh noticed a young boy coming to school in old
worn-out shoes. Clearly ①he needed a new pair, but Mr.
Aryeh also knew that the boy’s father, a proud man, would
be humiliated and offended if ②his son were treated as a
charity case and given a pair. How does a person with moral
imagination provide a boy with shoes, while not paining his
father’s soul? During a morning recess break, Mr. Aryeh
called the boy to his office because, he said, he needed to
test ③him on his English proficiency. He asked the boy
several questions, well within the youth’s grasp. “Wonderful!”
Mr. Aryeh said when the boy answered correctly. He gave
④the youngster two notes: one to be brought to a local
shoemaker, with instructions to give the boy a good pair of
shoes, for which Mr. Aryeh would pay; the second, a note
to the boy’s father telling ⑤him about the “prize” his son
had won.
영어 영역
3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
3 8
20. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Most people get trapped in their optimistic biases, so they
tend to listen to positive feedback and ignore negative
feedback. Although this may help them come across as
confident to others, in any area of competence (e.g.,
education, business, sports or performing arts) achievement
is 10% performance and 90% preparation. Thus, the more
aware you are of your weaknesses, the better prepared you
will be. Low self-confidence may turn you into a pessimist,
but when pessimism teams up with ambition it often
produces outstanding performance. To be the very best at
anything, you will need to be your harshest critic, and that
is almost impossible when your starting point is high
self-confidence. Exceptional achievers always experience
low levels of confidence and self-confidence, but they train
hard and practice continually until they reach an acceptable
level of competence.
① Never Reveal Your Weaknesses
② Negative Comments Are Harmful
③ The Risk of Ambition Without Effort
④ The Less Confident Are More Successful
⑤ High Self-Confidence Leads to Better Achievement
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
A painter I know can’t do anything in her studio without
rock’n’roll pounding out of the speakers. Turning it on turns
on a switch inside her. The beat gets her going. It’s the
metronome for her creative life. A writer friend can only
write outside. He can’t stand the thought of being tied
indoors to his word processor while a “great day” is
unfolding outside. So he carries his coffee mug out to work
in the warmth of an open porch in his backyard. Mystically,
he now believes he is missing nothing. In the end, there is
no one ideal condition for creativity. What works for one
person is useless for another. The only criterion is this:
Make it easy on yourself. Find a working environment where
the prospect of wrestling with your muse doesn’t scare you,
doesn’t shut you down. It should make you want to be
there, and once you find it, stick with it.
* muse: (예술적) 영감을 주는 신
① 집중적인 노력은 창의력 향상의 바탕이 된다.
② 음악 감상을 통해 창조적 영감을 얻을 수 있다.
③ 창작 활동을 위해 일과 휴식의 균형이 필요하다.
④ 창조적 활동을 위한 각자에게 맞는 작업 환경이 있다.
⑤ 창조적 영감은 예상치 않은 순간에 떠오르기도 한다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Our essentially subtropical body isn’t well suited to life in
the Arctic because we don’t have the fur of polar bears or
the thick, insulating fat of sea mammals. But we can make
fur clothing, shelters to contain warmth, and weapons with
which to hunt and defend ourselves. These items are good
examples of cultural adaptation, which show how culture is
used to survive the natural world. Keep in mind, though,
that people must also survive the cultural world they inhabit,
and that is just as important. For example, if you don’t
greet your neighbors the right way, you may cause bad
feelings; in the same way, your grandfather may not
appreciate your elaborate, back-slapping handshake the way
your buddy does. So although culture does help you survive
the natural world, it also tells you how to survive the
cultural world of social interactions.
① ways to improve biological adaptation
② the use of culture for human survival
③ genetic factors to reduce human adaptability
④ the influence of instruction on human survival
⑤ the role of communication in social interactions
23. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은?
When discussing the animal kingdom, each creature belongs
to a species scale of generalists to specialists. Specialist
creatures like the koala bear can only survive on an
extremely (A) limited / variable set of conditions: diet
(eucalyptus), climate (warm), environment (trees).
Generalists, on the other hand (think mice), are able to
survive just about anywhere. They can (B) dread / withstand
heat and cold, eat your organic breakfast cereal or seeds
and berries in the wild. So, specialist species thrive only
when conditions are perfect. They serve a very specific
purpose within their particular ecosystem and are good at
navigating it. However, should those conditions change — as a
result of nature or, more commonly, an outside force —
specialist species often become (C) extinct / widespread . In
contrast, mice can move from spot to spot on the globe,
adapt to different cultures, diets and weather systems. And
most importantly, they stay alive.
(A) (B) (C)
① limited dread extinct
② limited withstand widespread
③ limited withstand extinct
④ variable withstand widespread
⑤ variable dread widespread
영어 영역 4
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
4 8
24. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
In the 1970s, when schools began allowing students to use
portable calculators, many parents ①objected. They worried
that a reliance on the machines would weaken their children’s
grasp of mathematical concepts. The fears, subsequent
studies showed, were largely ②unneeded. No longer forced
to spend a lot of time on routine calculations, many students
gained a deeper understanding of the principles underlying
their exercises. Today, the story of the calculator is often
used to support the argument that our growing dependence
on online databases is ③disadvantageous. In freeing us from
the work of remembering, it’s said, the Web allows us to
devote more time to creative thought. The pocket calculator
④relieved the pressure on our working memory, letting us
use that critical short-term store for more abstract
reasoning. The calculator, a powerful but highly specialized
tool, turned out to be an ⑤aid to our working memory.
25. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
I remember one of the smartest I.T. executives ①for whom
I ever worked strongly resisting the movement to measure
programmer productivity that was popular at the time. He was
fond of saying that the biggest problem with managing
computer programmers is that you can never tell ②whether
they are working by looking at them. Picture two programmers
working side by side. One is leaning back in his chair with his
eyes ③closed and his feet on the desk. The other is working
hard, typing code into his computer. The one with his feet up
could be thinking, and the other one may be too busy typing
④to give it enough thought. In the end, the busy typist could
well produce ten times as many lines of code as the thinker,
which contain twice as many new problems as the thinker’s.
Unfortunately, most of the productivity measurement schemes
I have encountered ⑤measuring effort or apparent activity.
They would reward him and punish his thoughtful neighbor.
26. San Miniato에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
San Miniato is a town of about 26,000 that sits atop three
hills in the Arno river valley in Tuscany, Italy. The town’s
history is deeply rooted in its function as an important stop
along the trading route between France and Italy. To protect
its historic building character, the city has set detailed
criteria for the installation of signs, plaques, and posters and
has revised its street signs. To protect views of the town
and to limit visual intrusions, the city has made strict
regulations about the construction of cell phone towers. To
accommodate visitors and tourists and not intrude on the
urban layout and design, the town has built an underground
parking lot with an elevator to the city center.
① Arno강 유역의 구릉지에 위치한다.
② 프랑스와 이탈리아의 교역로에 위치한 중요한 기착지였다.
③ 건물의 역사성 보존을 위해 간판 설치의 세부 기준을 정했다.
④ 도시 미관을 위해 이동 전화 송신탑 설치에 관한 엄격한 규정
을 마련했다.
⑤ 도심에 지하 주차장을 건설하려는 계획을 취소했다.
27. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
They have not, however, always been considered places
of beauty.
Forests have always had a role in human society. ( ① )
They have been a source of building timber and firewood, of
wild game and foods like mushrooms. ( ② ) During the
Middle Ages, especially in parts of Northern Europe, they
developed a reputation for being places of darkness and fear,
the home of evil spirits and wild beasts. ( ③ ) In Germany
you might have been attacked by werewolves or a
semi-human Wild Man, a kind of ogre covered with coarse
hair who ate children. ( ④ ) Anglo-Saxon folk tales, such
as the eighth-century Beowulf, frequently set the action in
scary forests, a legacy inherited by the stories of Tolkien,
in which friendly hobbits are extremely frightened at the
thought of having to pass through the haunted Fangorn
Forest. ( ⑤ ) Out of this medieval vision comes our word
‘savage’, derived from silva, meaning a wood.
28. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Fascinated by how easily fish slip through water, scientists
and sportswear designers alike have examined fish skins at
the molecular level to determine why they have less friction
than humans. ① Researchers were surprised to discover that
shark skin, which is rough enough to be used as sandpaper
when dried, is one of the animal skins with the least
friction. ② Shark skin is covered by small, V-shaped bumps,
made from the same material as the sharks’ teeth. ③ Shark
fin is also incorrectly perceived by some as having high
nutritional value, as well as cancer-fighting abilities. ④ The
rough surface actually reduces drag as the shark glides
through the ocean, because the bumps efficiently channel the
water away from the surface. ⑤ Copied in fabric form, a
shark skin-like system woven into a textile’s structure
gives the fabric a hydrodynamic advantage.
* hydrodynamic: 유체 역학의
영어 영역
5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
5 8
29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The Trend of Blood Donation in Korea: 2005 - 2009
The graph above shows the trend of blood donation in
Korea from 2005 to 2009, in terms of the number of blood
donors and blood donation rates. ① The blood donation rate
was 5.3% in 2009, which was the highest during the given
period. ② The blood donation rate was the same both in
2005 and in 2006, and it showed constant increase
afterward. ③ The number of group blood donors was the
highest in 2005, and the number of individual blood donors
was the highest in 2009. ④ The year 2005 was the only
year when the number of group blood donors was larger
than that of individual blood donors. ⑤ The difference
between the number of group donors and that of individual
donors was the largest in 2009.
30. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Gabe Gabrielson has a nine-year-old son named Colin.
Like many nine-year-olds, Colin frequently finds
himself in disagreement with parental policies.
(A) After a few debates that left both of them feeling
frustrated, Gabe decided to change strategy, and
announced, “Okay, Colin, we’ll try it your way for three
days. But if you’re late for school any of those days,
then we go back to the old system.”
(B) For example, he protested Gabe’s policy that he get
fully dressed before coming down to breakfast. Gabe
didn’t particularly care what Colin wore at the breakfast
table, but he worried that if Colin didn’t dress first,
he’d wind up late for school. “But I’m more comfortable
in my pajamas!” Colin argued.
(C) Colin, amazed by the change in response, aced the trial
run. He wore his pajamas and stayed punctual. As a
result, the new practice stuck, and both sides are
happier with the outcome.
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
31. Bikes4Hope Support Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하지 않는 것은?
BIKES4HOPE SUPPORT NIGHT
Bikes4Hope is a non-profit organization dedicated to
sending bicycles to the children in remote villages in
Africa by collecting unwanted and old bicycles. You’re
invited to our fundraising event.
DATE & TIME
• Thursday March 27th, 2014; 7 p.m. - 11 p.m.
PERFORMERS
• Musicians: Eli John, Brett Wilson, Green Smith
• Magicians: Fun Brothers, Risky Button, Flying People
TICKETS
• Pre-sale at www.bikes4hope.org: $20
• On the door on the night: $25
• Children accompanied by an adult: Free
Thanks for your support and we truly hope to see
you on Thursday night!
① 아프리카로 자전거를 보내기 위한 기금 마련 행사이다.
② 3월 27일에 4시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 음악 공연과 마술 공연이 있다.
④ 입장권은 당일 현장에서만 판매한다.
⑤ 어른을 동반한 어린이는 무료로 입장한다.
32. 다음 글에 드러난 Hogan의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Hogan had already been walking for hours along the sand
track. He had drunk the last remaining drop of water an
hour before. His feet came down regularly one in front of
the other, sending up little clouds of dust. The dunes
stretched as far as the eye could see, motionless, on either
side of the track. Nothing was left but the dazzling sand
with its millions of tiny broken grains, and dry stones that
crumbled away in layers. No trucks passed. No aircraft ever
appeared in the immense sky. The nothingness was so great
that it could not even be called solitude any longer. It was
like floating on the ocean, thousands of miles from land,
while tiny waves sweep forward in ripples.
① satisfied and grateful ② relaxed and refreshed
③ hopeless and abandoned ④ excited and anticipating
⑤ ashamed and embarrassed
영어 영역 6
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
6 8
[33 ~ 37] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. Languages evolve differences because different groups of
people independently develop different words and different
pronunciations over the course of time. But the question
remains why those diverged languages don’t merge again
when formerly separated people spread out and re-contact
each other at speech boundaries. For instance, at the modern
boundary between Germany and Poland, there are Polish
villages near German villages, but the villagers still speak a
local variety of either German or of Polish, rather than a
mix of German and Polish. Why is that so? Probably the
main disadvantage of speaking a mixed language involves a
basic function of human language: as soon as you start to
speak to someone else, your language serves as an instantly
recognizable badge of your . It’s much
easier for wartime spies to wear the enemy’s uniform than
to imitate convincingly the enemy’s language and
pronunciation. People who speak your language are your
people, whereas someone speaking a different language is
apt to be regarded as a potentially dangerous stranger.
① artistic taste
② group identity
③ intellectual power
④ personal character
⑤ educational background
34. Our craving for is illustrated by a
study of religious Israeli women, carried out by
anthropologists Richard Sosis and W. Penn Handwerker.
During the 2006 Lebanon War the town of Tzfat and its
environs in the Galilee region of northern Israel were hit by
dozens of rockets daily. Although siren warnings alerted
Tzfat residents to protect their own lives by taking refuge
in bomb shelters, they could do nothing to protect their
houses. Realistically, that threat from the rockets was
unpredictable and uncontrollable. Nevertheless, about
two-thirds of the women interviewed by Sosis and
Handwerker recited psalms every day to cope with the
stress of the rocket attacks. When they were asked why
they did so, a common reply was that they felt compelled
“to do something” as opposed to doing nothing at all.
Although reciting psalms does not actually deflect rockets, it
did provide the women with a sense of control as they took
action in their own way. * deflect: 빗나가게 하다
① knowledge of the future
② relief from feeling helpless
③ exploring the unknown world
④ being accepted by our peers
⑤ freedom from social conventions
35. Risk management professionals look in the past for
information on the so-called worst-case scenario and use it
to estimate future risks ―this method is called “stress
testing.” They take the worst historical recession, the worst
war, or the worst point in unemployment as an exact estimate
for the worst future outcome. But they never notice the
following inconsistency: this so-called worst-case event,
when it happened, exceeded the worst case at the time. I
have called this mental defect the Lucretius problem, after the
Latin poetic philosopher who wrote that the fool believes that
the tallest mountain in the world will be equal to the tallest
one he has observed. The same can be seen in the Fukushima
nuclear reactor, which experienced a huge failure in 2011
when a tsunami struck. It had been built to endure the worst
past historical earthquake, with the builders not imagining
much worse —and not thinking that the worst past event had
to be a surprise, as it . [3점]
① had no precedent
② matched their prediction
③ led to better preparation
④ repeated itself over time
⑤ came earlier than expected
36. Think of how you developed your style of using the
brakes on your car. As you were mastering the skill of
taking curves, you gradually learned when to let go of the
accelerator and when and how hard to use the brakes.
Curves differ, and the variability you experienced while
learning ensures that you are now ready to brake at the
right time and strength for any curve you encounter. The
conditions for learning this skill are ideal, because you
receive immediate and unambiguous feedback every time you
go around a bend: the mild reward of a comfortable turn or
the mild punishment of some difficulty in handling the car if
you brake either too hard or not quite hard enough. The
situations that face a harbor pilot maneuvering large ships
are no less regular, but skill is much more difficult to
acquire by sheer experience because of the long delay
between actions and their noticeable outcomes. Whether
professionals have a chance to develop intuitive expertise
depends essentially on , as
well as on sufficient opportunity to practice. [3점]
① the ability to control emotions
② the assistance from instructors
③ the discovery of hidden talents
④ the desire to beat the opponents
⑤ the quality and speed of feedback
영어 영역
7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
7 8
37. The tight bonds we form with our tools go both ways.
Even as our technologies become extensions of ourselves,
we become extensions of our technologies. When the
carpenter takes his hammer into his hand, he can use that
hand to do only what a hammer can do. The hand becomes
an implement for pounding and pulling nails. When the
soldier puts the binoculars to his eyes, he can see only
what the lenses allow him to see. His field of view
lengthens, but he becomes blind to what’s nearby.
Nietzsche’s experience with his typewriter provides a
particularly good illustration of the way __________________.
Not only did the philosopher come to imagine that his
typewriter was “a thing like me”; he also sensed that he
was becoming a thing like it, that his typewriter was
shaping his thoughts. [3점]
① technologies exert their influence on us
② tools are refined and developed
③ we overcome our weaknesses
④ one invention builds on another
⑤ we put our passion into meaningful purposes
[38 ~ 39] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
38. Indeed, confusing people a little bit is beneficial ― it is
good for you and good for them. For example, imagine
someone extremely punctual who comes home at exactly six
o’clock every day for fifteen years. You can use his arrival
to set your watch. The fellow will cause his family anxiety
if he is barely a few minutes late. Someone with a slightly
more (A) schedule, with, say, a half-hour variation,
won’t do so. For similar reasons, stability is not good for the
economy: firms become very weak during long periods of
steady success without failure, and hidden vulnerabilities
accumulate silently under the surface ―so delaying crises is
not a very good idea. Likewise, (B) of ‘ups and downs’
in the market causes hidden risks to accumulate quietly. The
longer one goes without a market trauma, the worse the
damage when a real crisis occurs.
* vulnerability: 취약성
(A) (B)
① restricted frequency
② unpredictable expectation
③ unpredictable absence
④ consistent duration
⑤ consistent experience
39. My suggestion is to understand and make use of the
changes in people’s strengths and weaknesses as they grow
older. We can say that useful attributes tending to decrease
with age include ambition, desire to compete, physical
strength and endurance, and capacity for sustained mental
concentration. (A) , useful attributes tending to
increase with age include experience of one’s field,
understanding of people and relationships, and ability to help
other people without one’s own ego getting in the way.
These shifts in strengths result in many older workers
choosing to devote more of their efforts to supervising,
administering, advising, and teaching. (B) , my farmer
friends in their 80s spend less time on horseback and on
tractors, more time making strategic decisions about the
business of farming; my older lawyer friends spend less
time in court, more time mentoring younger lawyers.
(A) (B)
① In other words For instance
② In other words Instead
③ Additionally In contrast
④ Conversely In contrast
⑤ Conversely For instance
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Plants generate hundreds of compounds that they use
to protect themselves from being overconsumed by
insects and animals. While some plants use these
compounds to reduce all foraging, most plants tolerate, or
even enjoy, about an 18 percent foraging rate (10 to 25
percent depending on the plant) before they begin to
initiate high levels of protective compounds. Many of the
actions of animals when they eat plants (termed
“herbivory”) are necessary for both plant and ecosystem
health. Herbivory alters the density, composition, and
health of plant communities through eating plants,
dispersing seeds, and defecation. Some plants produce an
initial series of leaves designed to be eaten, and more
luxurious growth only occurs once that has happened. For
many plants, metabolism and respiration are all stimulated
by animal and insect feeding. It is only after foraging
rises above a certain level that many plant defensive
compounds are produced in quantity or come into play.
* foraging: (동물에 의한) 피식(被食) ** defecation: 배변

Until foraging rate reaches a certain point, many plants
tend to (A) the production of high-level defensive
compounds for the (B) that foraging brings to them.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① suspend prosperity ② suspend competition
③ extend prosperity ④ extend threat
⑤ stimulate competition
영어 영역 8
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
8 8
[41 ∼ 43] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Allen Sherman, the comic songwriter best known for
“Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah” was once in the middle of
an intense conversation with his wife when his young
son entered to show off a drawing he had just finished.
The childish drawing was quickly dismissed by Sherman,
who was annoyed at having (a) his conversation
interrupted. The boy, hurt by his father’s rejection of
the picture, threw it down on the floor, rushed up to his
room, and slammed the door.
(B)
The embarrassed boy ran up to (b) his room, slammed
the door, and refused to come down to the party. But a
little later his mother came up to fetch him. When she
brought him downstairs, he saw his grandmother proudly
walking around the room with a large bowl filled with a
variety of beautiful fruits and, in the middle, the polished
football he had brought home. When a guest asked his
grandmother to explain what a football was doing in the
middle of her fruit bowl, she told (c) him about the gift
from her grandson and added, “From a child is beautiful,
anything.”
(C)
Sherman took the football home, polished it till it
shone, and left it for his grandmother. His mother saw
the football first, and became upset with him for leaving
his toys around. When (d) he explained that it was for
his grandmother’s party, his mother burst into laughter:
“A football for the party? Don’t you understand your own
grandma? Not a football, fruit bowl. Grandma needs a
fruit bowl for the party.”
(D)
The slamming door reminded the now embarrassed
Sherman of a door that he had slammed twenty-five
years earlier. One morning he had heard his
Yiddish-speaking grandmother announce that she needed
a “football” for a large party she would be hosting that
evening. Although the young Sherman wondered why his
grandmother needed a football, he was determined to
obtain one for her. He went around his neighborhood and
finally found one boy, a bully who punched (e) him in
the nose before agreeing to give over his football in
exchange for Sherman’s best toys.
* Yiddish: 독일어ㆍ히브리어 등의 혼성 언어
41. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
42. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
43. 위 글의 Allen Sherman에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 어머니가 부르러 온 후에야 파티에 참석했다.
② 과일 그릇 한가운데 놓여 있는 축구공을 보았다.
③ 할머니에게 드릴 축구공을 깨끗이 닦았다.
④ 축구공을 발견한 어머니로부터 칭찬을 들었다.
⑤ 가장 좋은 장난감들을 주고 축구공을 얻었다.
[44 ∼ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
In the mid-1970s some scientists observed employees
of two manufacturing plants in the United States. One
plant was located in a large metropolitan area, the other
in a rural community with a population of three
thousand. On average, the employees had worked at their
respective plants for twenty years. Sadly, both plants
were scheduled to shut down, and all workers were
about to lose their jobs.
For months, the men came to work knowing that in
only a few weeks they would be unemployed.
Anticipating the loss of their workplace was stressful.
The anxiety was triggered to a large extent by the
uncertainty of what lay ahead. How would they cope
with unemployment? Would they find another job?
Scientists who followed these workers found that the
employees experienced more days of illness before the
plants were shut than during the weeks of unemployment
that followed. The anxiety induced by anticipating the
loss of their jobs damaged their health and well-being.
Ironically, once unemployed, the workers became
healthier. It’s because the uncertainty of how life would
be without a job was . Anxiety was reduced,
and attention turned to finding a new job, rather than
worrying aimlessly about what might be.
44. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Focus Your Energy on Seizing an Opportunity
② Turn Your Attention to the Unemployed
③ Work Stress: How You Can Beat It
④ Enduring Uncertainty Is a Sign of Maturity
⑤ Anticipating Disaster Is Worse Than Disaster
45. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① removed ② renewed
③ visualized ④ introduced
⑤ underestimated

1
8
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, I think we should.
② We enjoyed a great party.
③ I wonder why they cancelled it.
④ Yes, we can attend the meeting.
⑤ No, I don’t have time for dinner.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Great. Now I can go on a vacation.
② Of course. I did everything I could do.
③ Thank you. I’ll delete the files right away.
④ I’m sorry. I’ll finish it as soon as possible.
⑤ Don’t apologize. I’m sure you’ll get better soon.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 원예 동아리 가입을 권유하려고
② 티셔츠 수령 방법을 안내하려고
③ 채소 재배 방법을 설명하려고
④ 회장 후보 자격을 공지하려고
⑤ 회비 납부를 요청하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 독서가 글쓰기에 미치는 영향
② 토론 능력 향상을 위한 방법
③ 일기를 쓸 때의 유의 사항
④ 자유 토론 방식의 장점
⑤ 잘못된 상식의 위험성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 소설가 － 독자 ② 면접관 － 구직자
③ 사진작가 － 패션모델 ④ 잡지 기자 － 영화배우
⑤ 관광 가이드 － 여행객
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 요리책 소개하기 ② 조리사 추천하기
③ 요리 수업 신청하기 ④ 조리 기구 준비하기
⑤ 요리 웹사이트 알려 주기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 변경된 시간에 배드민턴 연습을 할 수
없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 댄스 연습을 해야 해서
② 코치를 구할 수 없어서
③ 체육관이 공사 중이어서
④ 학교 행사에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 도서관 아르바이트를 해야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $300 ② $360 ③ $450 ④ $500 ⑤ $540
10. 대화를 듣고, 학부모 교사 회의에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지
않은 것을 고르시오.
① 유인물 복사 ② 컴퓨터 설치 ③ 간식 구입
④ 강당 청소 ⑤ 현수막 걸기
11. summer camp에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① 수영장 시설을 갖추고 있다.
② 수학과 과학 프로그램을 제공한다.
③ 캠프 기간은 5일이다.
④ 등록비는 무료이다.
⑤ 온라인 신청만 가능하다.
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 관람할 영화를
고르시오. [3점]
Movie Information
Title Genre 3D Movie Time Age Limit
① A Animation × 10:30 a.m. All ages
② B Action ○ 11:00 a.m. Over 19
③ C SF ○ 2:30 p.m. Over 15
④ D Comedy × 5:00 p.m. All ages
⑤ E Thriller ○ 5:30 p.m. Over 15
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Okay. I’ll go find another one soon.
② Never mind. I’ll give you my advice.
③ But didn’t you already contact him last year?
④ I’m sure you’ll do a great job at the program.
⑤ Then can you send them to me by text message?
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① I’d like to publish a book.
② I’ll deliver them on schedule.
③ I’d prefer to get them by mail.
④ I’ll be right back and buy them.
⑤ I’ll revise the review right away.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Helen이 손님에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Helen:
① Don’t worry. I will hold the shirt for you.
② I’m sorry, but we don’t sell products on credit.
③ You can visit the lost and found for your wallet.
④ I apologize. We don’t have anything in your size.
⑤ Let me show you a different type of shirt instead.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how to become organized
② the importance of donation
③ factors that affect personality
④ why we should collect things
⑤ problems of throwing things away
17. 언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① papers ② clock ③ toys
④ lamp ⑤ flower vase
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Ms. Mattie,
Thank you very much for offering me the research
engineer position at ABC Company. However, after
a great deal of thought, I have decided not to accept
the position. Your company has an excellent reputation
as a research institution and has many aspects that
are very attractive to me. Unfortunately, I cannot
accept your offer because I have decided to pursue
another opportunity. Once again, thank you for your
consideration.
Very truly yours,
Christine Mahoe
① 입사 제안을 거절하려고
② 계약 조건을 확인하려고
③ 업무 조정을 요청하려고
④ 입사 시험 결과를 문의하려고
⑤ 입사 지원 절차를 알아보려고
19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Obviously, one of the judgments the public has of us is
whether or not our telephone service is good. Technically, if
they get their calls through, efficiently and promptly, they
get what they want. That, however, is not all they want.
They want to have the service rendered to them in a manner
that pleases them; they want not only efficiency but courtesy
and consideration; and they are in a position to get what
they want. They are in the driver’s seat; they are paying the
bills; and an understanding of that fact is a real and
fundamental basis of public relations. In order, therefore, for
a great company to satisfactorily serve the public, it must
have a philosophy and a method of doing business which
will allow and insure that its people serve the public
efficiently and in a pleasing manner.
① 성공적인 기업 경영을 위해 사원 복지 향상에 힘써야 한다.
② 효율적이면서 고객을 만족시키는 서비스를 제공해야 한다.
③ 기업 이익의 일정 부분을 사회에 환원해야 한다.
④ 공공 예절을 지키며 휴대 전화를 사용해야 한다.
⑤ 고객의 요구에 맞는 신제품을 개발해야 한다.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
On the path to excellence, some obstacles may initially
seem overwhelming. Every performer experiences this feeling,
even the greatest performers in the world. If you believe
that the obstacles are too great to overcome, you will prove
yourself right even when you are wrong. Most seemingly
impossible obstacles can be overcome by seeing possibilities,
focusing on what is within your control, taking the first
step, and then focusing on the next step and the next step
after that. If your commitment becomes weak, remember
your dream and why it is important to you, find simple
joys in your daily pursuits, rejoice in the little victories or
small steps forward, and embrace the process of ongoing
learning. With a positive perspective and persistence, you
will get through and find a way through all obstacles.
① 시작이 좋아야 큰 성공을 거둘 수 있다.
② 꿈을 이루기 위해 현실적인 목표를 세워야 한다.
③ 긍정적 시각과 끈기가 있으면 난관을 극복할 수 있다.
④ 갈등을 유발하지 않으려면 감정의 조절이 필요하다.
⑤ 지속적인 학습을 위해서는 동기부여가 필요하다.
21. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
For many years now, mediated entertainment such as TV
and film has been able to stimulate our optical and auditory
senses with sights and sounds. Some forms of new media,
however, even engage our senses of touch and smell. The
view the wearer of some special device sees is projected on
the screen behind him. Wearers become immersed in the
computerized scene and use the gloves to pick up and
move simulated objects. Many virtual reality games and
rides now allow audiences and players to feel sensations of
motion and touch. New media may also include aromas,
such as Disney’s “Soaring Over California” attraction at the
California Adventure theme park, where audiences smell
orange orchards and pine forests while enjoying a simulated
hang-gliding experience across the countryside. Makers of
emerging forms of entertainment will likely continue to
experiment with ways they can simulate and manipulate
reality by stimulating our senses.
① TV and Film: Blessing or Curse?
② How We Operate an Audio System
③ Seeing Is More Important Than Touching
④ “Soaring Over California,” a Theme Park Adventure
⑤ New Mediated Entertainment: Stimulate More Senses!
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Recently, researchers have suggested that the purpose of
laughter is not just to communicate that one is in a playful
state, but to actually induce this state in others as well.
According to this view, the peculiar sounds of laughter have
a direct effect on the listener, inducing positive emotional
arousal that mirrors the emotional state of the laugher,
perhaps by activating certain specialized brain circuits. In this
way, laughter may serve an important biosocial function of
coupling together the positive emotions of members of a
group and thereby coordinating their activities. This would
explain why laughter is so infectious; when we hear someone
laughing, it is almost impossible not to feel cheerful and
begin laughing too.
① effects of laughter on others
② benefits of activating brain circuits
③ strategies for coordinating activities
④ negative aspects of emotional reactions
⑤ importance of grouping in communication
23. NAS Bird Watching Adventure에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
nAS Bird Watching Adventure
NAS National Wildlife Refuge, Houston
Sunday, July 20, 2014, 8:00 － 18:00
$80 per person
The tour starts at the NAS Forest & Trail
Headquarters at 8:00 am. Once we arrive at the
refuge at about 10:00 am, we will begin our
six-hour hike, searching for birds and learning
about the plants and animals of the refuge.
∙What to expect: The hike covers 3 to 4 miles
and includes moderately difficult terrain.
∙What’s provided: Transportation, lunch, and
expert guides.
∙What to bring: Comfortable shoes, long pants,
and sunblock.
For more information, visit www.wls.gov/nasforest.
① NAS Forest & Trail Headquarters에서 오전 8시에 시작된다.
② 야생 생물 보호 구역의 동식물에 관해서 배울 수 있다.
③ 도보 여행의 거리는 3～4 마일이다.
④ 교통편은 제공하지만 점심은 제공하지 않는다.
⑤ 편한 신발, 긴 바지, 자외선 차단제를 가져와야 한다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
24. Swan Lake에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
SWAN LAKE
July 3 (Thu.) - 4 (Fri.), 2014, at the State Theater
Time: Thu. 8:00 pm / Fri. 7:00 pm
Prices: A Seats - $120 / B Seats - $90
Running Time: 2 hours
Minimum Age: Children under 7 will not be admitted.
The ballet is performed to the live music of the
State Theater Orchestra.
∙20% Early Purchase Discount until May 31
- To receive this discount, you must purchase your
tickets from our website at www.statetheater.com.
∙Phone Reservations: 887-885-7909
- Business hours: 09:00 － 18:00 (7 days a week)
∙Cancellation Policy
- On the day of performance: No refund
- 1～5 days before the performance: 30% cancellation fee
① 공연 시간은 세 시간 동안이다.
② 녹음된 음악에 맞춰 발레가 공연된다.
③ 웹사이트에서 5월 31일까지 티켓을 구매하면 할인 혜택이 있다.
④ 전화 예매는 평일에만 가능하다.
⑤ 공연 당일에 취소해도 환불받을 수 있다.
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentage of U.S. advertising
spending by media and consumer time spent using each type
of media in 2011. ① In the case of TV, both advertising
spending and consumer time spent took up the largest
proportion with 43% and 40%, respectively. ② Print
ranked second in advertising spending, whereas it ranked
last in consumer time spent. ③ Web accounted for the third
largest proportion in both advertising spending and
consumer time spent. ④ As for the percentage gap between
advertising spending and consumer time spent, Radio
showed the smallest gap. ⑤ The percentage gap between
advertising spending and consumer time spent was larger in
Web than in Mobile.
26. Tammy Rahr에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
During her childhood years, the artist Tammy Rahr spent
a lot of time outdoors making things from flowers and dirt.
Then Tammy and her family moved from the woodlands of
New York State to an urban city outside of Los Angeles,
California. The experience made her more aware of what was
going on in the world. After returning to New York State
with her family, Tammy faced another lesson in growing up.
A gifted student, she was sent to college when she was just
14. Tammy was able to earn her high school diploma and
some college credit before trying her hand at a number of
different jobs. Eventually, she moved to Santa Fe, New Mexico,
and studied at the Institute of American Indian Arts. After
graduating from the institute, she remained active with it and
the museum there.
① 어린 시절에 꽃과 흙으로 무언가를 만들면서 많은 시간을 보냈다.
② New York 주에서 California로 이사했다.
③ 가족과 함께 New York 주로 되돌아갔다.
④ 고등학교 졸업장을 받지 못했다.
⑤ Institute of American Indian Arts에서 공부했다.
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
In the twentieth century, advances in technology, from
refrigeration to sophisticated ovens to air transportation
① that carries fresh ingredients around the world, contributed
immeasurably to baking and pastry making. At the beginning
of the twenty-first century, the popularity of fine breads and
pastries ② are growing even faster than new chefs can be
trained. Interestingly enough, many of the technological advances
in bread making have sparked a reaction among bakers and
consumers ③ alike. They are looking to reclaim some of the
flavors of old-fashioned breads that ④ were lost as baking
became more industrialized and baked goods became more
refined, standardized, and ― some would say ― flavorless.
Bakers are researching methods for ⑤ producing the handmade
sourdough breads of the past, and they are experimenting
with specialty flours in their search for flavor.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
Although children watch television at various times, the
programming that they view alone tends to be specifically
aimed at children. In the United States particularly, most of
the advertising during this segment consists of ads for food,
particularly sugared food. During the run-up to Christmas,
(A) increasing / decreasing numbers of ads concern toys and
games. Such practices are believed to put pressure on parents
to yield to what the media have dubbed “pester power.”
This has led to calls for legislation to (B) promote / regulate
advertising in Europe and the United States. Indeed, the
Swedish government has outlawed television advertising of
products aimed at children under 12, and recently in the
United States, 50 psychologists (C) rejected / signed a petition
calling for a ban on the advertising of children’s goods.
* pester power: 부모에게 떼를 써서 물건을 구매하게 하는 힘
** petition: 탄원(서)
(A) (B) (C)
① increasing …… promote …… rejected
② increasing …… regulate …… signed
③ increasing …… regulate …… rejected
④ decreasing …… promote …… signed
⑤ decreasing …… regulate …… signed
29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Dave Butcher, director of training for Sea World in
Florida, showed me more than I’d imagined possible. His sea
lions worked for social rewards as well as fish. Consequently,
he did not have to keep his sea lions hungry in order to make
① them perform. During and after the day’s performances,
the sea lions could have all the fish ② they wanted. One result
was that ③ they were not irritable, as any hungry animal
might be. The sea lions were friendly to those humans they
knew and enjoyed being with ④ them. I was surprised to see
trainers on their lunch hour sunbathing in a pile with their
sea lions. Another result of stopping food deprivation was
that these sea lions grew and grew! In fact, ⑤ they became
bigger than most trained sea lions in the past, which weren’t
given enough food.
[30～32] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
30. The true champion recognizes that excellence often flows
most smoothly from , a fact that can get lost in
these high-tech days. I used to train with a world-class
runner who was constantly hooking himself up to pulse
meters and pace keepers. He spent hours collecting data that
he thought would help him improve. In fact, a good 25
percent of his athletic time was devoted to externals other
than working out. Sports became so complex for him that he
forgot how to enjoy himself. Contrast his approach with that
of the late Abebe Bikila, the Ethiopian who won the 1960
Olympic Marathon running barefoot. High-tech clothing and
digital watches were not part of his world. Abebe Bikila
simply ran. Many times in running, and in other areas of
life, less is more. [3점]
① talent ② patience ③ simplicity
④ generosity ⑤ confidence
31. The origins of contemporary Western thought can be
traced back to the golden age of ancient Greece, when Greek
thinkers laid the foundations for modern Western politics,
philosophy, science, and law. Their novel approach was to
pursue rational inquiry through adversarial discussion: The
best way to evaluate one set of ideas, they decided, was
by . In the
political sphere, the result was democracy, in which
supporters of rival policies vied for rhetorical supremacy; in
philosophy, it led to reasoned arguments and dialogues about
the nature of the world; in science, it prompted the
construction of competing theories to try to explain natural
phenomena; in the field of law, the result was the adversarial
legal system. This approach is the foundation for the modern
Western way of life, in which politics, commerce, science, and
law are all rooted in orderly competition. [3점]
* adversarial: 대립 관계의
** vie: 다투다, 경쟁하다
① forcing it upon the opponents
② pursuing a conventional standard
③ testing it against another set of ideas
④ promoting a consensus among supporters
⑤ rejecting competing theories without discussion
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
32. I would like to compare the shift from analog to
digital film-making to the shift from fresco and tempera
to oil painting in the early Renaissance. A painter making
a fresco has limited time before the paint dries, and once
it has dried, no further changes to the image are possible.
Similarly, a traditional filmmaker has limited means of
modifying images once they are recorded on film.
Medieval tempera painting can be compared to the
practice of special effects during the analog period of
cinema. A painter working with tempera could modify
and rework the image, but the process was painstaking
and slow. The switch to oils greatly liberated painters by
allowing them to quickly create much larger compositions
as well as to modify them as long as necessary. Similarly,
,
digital technology redefines what can be done with
cinema. [3점]
① by equating oil painting with analog film-making
② by allowing a filmmaker to treat a film image as an
oil painting
③ with the shift from oil painting styles to fresco ones
in making films
④ by integrating fresco painting techniques into the
film-making process
⑤ with the introduction of tempera painting methods to
cinematic special effects
33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
When there is a discrepancy between the verbal message
and the nonverbal message, the latter typically weighs more
in forming a judgment. (A) , a friend might react
to a plan for dinner with a comment like “that’s good,” but
with little vocal enthusiasm and a muted facial expression.
In spite of the verbal comment, the lack of expressive
enthusiasm suggests that the plan isn’t viewed very
positively. In such a case, the purpose of the positive
comment might be to avoid a disagreement and support the
friend, but the lack of a positive expression unintentionally
leaks a more candid, negative reaction to the plan. Of
course, the muted expressive display might also be strategic
and intentional. (B) , the nonverbal message is
deliberate, but designed to let the partner know one’s candid
reaction indirectly. It is then the partner’s responsibility to
interpret the nonverbal message and make some adjustment
in the plan.
(A) (B)
① In addition …… Instead
② In addition …… However
③ In contrast …… That is
④ For example …… However
⑤ For example …… That is
34. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Early one night in 1973 in my old and cheap apartment
in Bangor, Maine, I got a phone call from my agent, Bill,
who was helping me publish my first novel. “Are you
sitting down?” Bill asked. “No,” I said. “Do I need to?”
“You might,” he said. “The publication rights for your
book were sold for four hundred thousand dollars!” I was
completely speechless. That amount of money was beyond
my wildest expectations. I was sure I hadn’t heard him
right. I couldn’t have. I asked, “Did you say it went for
forty thousand dollars?” Bill said it again as clearly as he
could, “Four hundred thousand dollars. Congratulations,
Steve.” “Are you sure, Bill?” I said in disbelief. He said he
was. We talked for another half an hour, but I don’t
remember a single word of what we said.
① angry ② jealous
③ astonished ④ sympathetic
⑤ disappointed
[35～36] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
35. Music can convey the scope of a film, effectively
communicating whether the motion picture is an epic drama
or a story that exists on a more personal scale. Music can
convey the quality and size of a space. ① For example, in
Alien and Olivier’s Hamlet, the music serves at times to make
small and/or artificial spaces seem more grand and to
enhance the sense of realism. ② In addition, music can
establish a narrative’s placement in time. ③ Music for motion
pictures often serves to authenticate the era or to provide a
sense of nostalgia. ④ Music has traditionally been classified
by musical instruments. ⑤ Examples of the former would
include Amadeus and Immortal Beloved, while a sense of
nostalgia is communicated through the music selected for
films such as American Graffiti and The Big Chill.
36. It is difficult to appreciate what a temperature of
20,000,000℃ means. ① If the solar surface, not the center,
were as hot as this, the radiation emitted into space would
be so great that the whole Earth would be vaporized within
a few minutes. ② Indeed, this is just what would happen if
some cosmic giant were to peel off the outer layers of the
Sun like skinning an orange, for the tremendously hot inner
regions would then be exposed. ③ It is believed that the
brightness of the Sun can be predicted theoretically.
④ Fortunately, no such circumstance is possible, and the
outer layers of the Sun provide a sort of blanket that protects
us from its inner fires. ⑤ Yet in spite of these blanketing
layers, some energy must leak through from the Sun’s center
to its outer regions, and this leakage is of just the right
amount to compensate for the radiation emitted by the
surface into surrounding space.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
[37～38] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
37.
Mom and Dad went to dinner at a nice restaurant. On
that first night to myself, Dad entrusted me with his
movie projector and all the reels of film.
(A) Then I can play the film backward and watch the cat fly
down to the floor and see all the splashes of ice cream
slurp themselves back into the dish. I made Simon jump in
and out several times before I watched the rest of the film.
(B) He said I could do everything myself that night. So I
set up the screen at one end of the living room. I turned
on the projector, turned off the light, put the bowl of
popcorn in my lap, and settled in to watch the film
labeled HATTIE-1951.
(C) It’s one of my favorites because my third birthday party
is on it and I can watch our old cat Simon jump up on
the dining room table and land in a dish of ice cream.
* slurp: 후루룩 소리를 내다
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
38.
Since group performance in problem solving is superior to
even the individual work of the most expert group members,
it should not be surprising that students learn better when
they cooperate. However, there is one issue that needs further
consideration.
(A) In addition to that benefit, helping lower-ability students
often pulls higher-ability students to a more sophisticated
understanding of the material. The cliché that teachers
learn as much as their pupils is certainly true.
(B) Not quite. Knowledge, happily, is not a zero-sum product.
Higher-ability students can reinforce their own knowledge
by teaching those with lower ability.
(C) Specifically, the technique of having students help one
another raises the question of whether students with lower
ability are being helped at the expense of those with
higher ability. Is this true?
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?
But no one, even your child, is exactly like you.
Parents often believe that they are providing help to their
children when they constantly correct and criticize them,
assuming that they will grow from these remarks. But ask
yourself: Do you like being corrected? Do you grow when
you are constantly criticized? ( ① ) In truth, we tend to
stay the same when we are criticized. ( ② ) We want to
defend what we have done, and our innate stubbornness
refuses to permit us to accept the criticism we are receiving.
( ③ ) Behind virtually all criticism is the sentence “If only
you were more like me, and living life as I see it, you
would be a lot better off.” ( ④ ) Praise your children for
attempting a task, even if it was unsuccessful, and for
taking risks. ( ⑤ ) Create an environment in which your
children know that you are with them in their efforts, rather
than looking to criticize them.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
An ant turns right, left, and moves ahead over a sandy
hill. How can we explain the complexity of the path it
chose? We can think up a sophisticated program in the
ant’s brain, but it does not work. What we have
overlooked is the ant’s environment. The ant may be
following a simple rule: get out of the sun and back to the
nest. Complex behavior does not imply complex mental
strategies. The same holds for humans. The apparent
complexity of a man’s behavior over time is largely a
reflection of the complexity of the environment in which
he finds himself. People adapt to their environments much
as gelatin does; if you wish to know what form it will
have when it solidifies, study the shape of the mold that
holds the gelatin. To understand behavior, one has to look
at both the mind and the environment.
* gelatin: 젤라틴, 정제한 아교
󰀻
Although we tend to (A) complex behavior with
complex mental operations, (B) factors need to be
considered as well for a better understanding of such
behavior.
(A) (B)
① associate …… genetic
② associate …… environmental
③ identify …… psychological
④ replace …… psychological
⑤ replace …… environmental
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
When someone asks us, “How does that work?” or
“Why does that happen?” we tend to answer the question
directly if we know the answer. After all, it is efficient.
Another person asks a question; we provide the answer to
the question. It is usually a win-win. The problem with
this is that the direct approach can have an unintended
consequence: the loss of confidence. Although the
question wanted for an explanation, what the asker
received was a statement of fact. Why does oil float on
top of water in a glass? Relative density. What causes
climate change? Increased CO2 in the atmosphere. Why
does the ocean have tides? The moon. Giving direct,
accurate, and factual answers may seem to solve the
problem from the perspective of the answerer. But in
reality, it can shut the asker down. A statement of fact
with no other context puts the burden on the asker to take
the next step. If the asker isn’t familiar with relative
density or CO2, he or she is likely to move on rather than
ask a follow-up question or probe for related ideas. Any
hope of becoming a customer of that idea is lost. This is
a failure in the form of a lost opportunity. Although direct
answers are often needed and well-placed, they do not
work universally. A skilled explainer learns to see the
intent behind the question and formulate an answer that
focuses on understanding instead of .
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Give Simpler Answers!
② How Can We Ask Questions Properly?
③ Scientific Facts: What the Asker Needs
④ Accurate Answers: A Mirror of Knowledge
⑤ Why Is Giving Direct Answers Problematic?
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① efficiency ② diversity ③ fluency
④ privacy ⑤ honesty
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
It was my last football game as a college player. I made
the final tackle and we won. As people chanted my
name, (a) I was carried off the field on the shoulders of
my teammates. Although I wasn’t a great student or a
great football player, I ended up not only graduating from
my dream university but becoming a hero of the team.
People keep asking me how I did it. Here is my story.
(B)
It was so hard to break out of the box, but (b) I began
to feel an urgent need for a change. I signed up for the
Army and went to the Vietnam War. A lot of people were
worried, but I said, “Well, I’m going to get out of my box
by deciding what to do myself instead of having someone
else tell (c) me what to do.” With that one crucial shift in
thinking, my whole attitude changed. I began to dream of
going to one of the best universities in the country and
playing football.
(C)
I was born into a large poor family in Chicago. As a kid,
I had visions of being a hero ― a police officer or an
astronaut. However, people would always tell me, “You
can’t do that. You aren’t smart enough. You aren’t strong
enough.” Moreover, (d) I didn’t do well in school, and I had
no hope of getting into any college. After high school, I
gave up on my dream of going to college and got a
part-time job instead. I felt like I was living in a box labeled
“This is where you belong.”
(D)
After I finished my time in the Army, I packed my bags
and went to my dream university. I knocked on the door
of one of the professors’ offices and said, “Please, tell me
how to get in here.” The professor could see that I was
determined. He said, “I can’t let you in the university, but
(e) I will see you whenever you need my advice or help.”
It took me a long time, but I eventually got into that
university, became a football player, and graduated.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 주인공에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 대학에서 풋볼 선수였다.
② 육군에 입대했다.
③ Chicago에서 태어났다.
④ 고등학교 졸업 직후 대학에 진학했다.
⑤ 입학하고 싶어하는 대학의 교수를 찾아갔다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

1
8
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, thanks. I don’t like pizza.
② Right. We can use it anytime.
③ Yes. You can get it from a store.
④ It’s okay. You’ll do better next time.
⑤ Sure. You need to download the app first.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. I’ll try it.
② Actually, I was too sick.
③ Luckily, I got a high score.
④ Sorry. But I can’t teach you.
⑤ Well, I bought a birthday card.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 직원 채용을 안내하려고
② 화산의 위험성을 경고하려고
③ 야생 동물 보호를 호소하려고
④ 모험 여행 참가자를 모집하려고
⑤ 전통 음식의 우수성을 홍보하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 청소년기 교우 관계의 특성
② 대화 시 언어 선택의 중요성
③ 규칙적인 운동과 건강의 상관관계
④ 봉사 활동이 청소년에게 미치는 영향
⑤ 부모와 십 대 자녀 간의 갈등 해소 방법
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 은행원 － 고객 ② 아파트 주민 － 경비원
③ 호텔 지배인 － 투숙객 ④ 항공기 승무원 － 탑승객
⑤ 편의점 직원 － 택배 기사
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to revise the script of the play
② to make a poster for the concert
③ to change the design of a costume
④ to build the stage for the musical
⑤ to confirm the rehearsal schedule
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 작년에 병원에 입원했던 이유를 고르시오.
① 상한 우유를 마셔서 ② 과식으로 배탈이 나서
③ 독성 식물을 만져서 ④ 임상 실험에 참여하려고
⑤ 건강 검진을 받기 위해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $140 ② $180 ③ $200 ④ $252 ⑤ $280
10. 대화를 듣고, 슬라이드 자료에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 디자인 ② 글자 크기 ③ 음향 효과
④ 사진 ⑤ 도표
11. Global in Action에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오.
① 비영리 기관이다.
② 전직 테니스 선수가 설립했다.
③ 1,000명 이상의 회원이 있다.
④ 집 짓는 일을 도와준다.
⑤ 재정적 기부를 받지 않는다.
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 수강할 방과 후
프로그램을 고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Sorry. I can’t work the night shift.
② No worries. I’ll go to the music store.
③ Definitely. He’ll move in with me soon.
④ Sure. I’ll tell him not to practice late at night.
⑤ That’s okay. He won’t mind playing the guitar.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Don’t worry. I can reserve the seats right away.
② Too bad. I was hoping you could join us.
③ Well done! Now we can enjoy our trip.
④ You’re right. I’d rather take the next flight.
⑤ Thanks. I had a really good time at the festival.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Minsu가 Allison에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Minsu: Allison,
① I’ll hand in your paper for you.
② I can help you correct the errors.
③ I can research the Joseon Dynasty.
④ you should watch a historical movie.
⑤ you should buy an English dictionary.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① tips for a safe hiking trip
② advice for traveling at night
③ qualifications for a park ranger
④ finding shelter in the mountains
⑤ arranging group tours in the wild
17. 고려할 사항으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① weather ② clothing ③ food
④ first aid kit ⑤ emergency supplies
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
If you’re one of the countless people
whose mind and body have been
overworked, you need a program that
will give you a more positive and energetic life: the
Health Management Program offered by the ABC
Well-Being Institute. This program lasts for six
weeks and consists of three different components:
Daily Targets, Walking Plans, and Eating Plans.
Each week, you’ll be advised by our health experts
and introduced to new physical activity targets. Are
you serious about improving your life immediately?
Then, you can start by enrolling in our fantastic
program today.
① 스포츠 센터 강사를 모집하려고
② 건강관리 프로그램을 홍보하려고
③ 걷기 운동의 효과를 강조하려고
④ 스트레스의 위험성을 경고하려고
⑤ 약물 남용의 부작용을 설명하려고
19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Everybody has moments of doubt about something or
other from time to time; it is a natural process. The
challenge is not to let those moments accumulate and
affect your self-belief. You will always face the challenge
of other people’s comments and opinion. There are
people that you feel good being around and others you
don’t. Some people give you positive energy because
they believe in you. You feel it and you rise to the
occasion. Others may always have a negative comment to
make about what you are doing or talking about. Don’t
let these comments rock your self-belief. Always question
the person’s reason for the comment. If it is based on
fact, you should listen; if not, then it is only their
opinion. You will need to stay strong.
* rise to the occasion: 위기 상황에서 능력을 발휘하다
① 인맥이 넓은 사람들과 교제하라.
② 성공하기 위해 도전적인 자세를 가지라.
③ 일시적 감정으로 타인을 비판하지 말라.
④ 좌절감을 느낄 때는 성공한 경험을 생각하라.
⑤ 선별적인 의견 수용으로 자기 확신이 흔들리지 않게 하라.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
20. 다음 글에 드러난 Delia의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Delia stepped out of the front door of her house, and the
day welcomed her with a warm and sunny smile. With each
step, she thought, “I can’t wait for today’s class.” Her
family had recently moved into the neighborhood, and the
new school year had just begun at Elanova High School.
Her new school offered ballet lessons, and Delia eagerly
signed up. She was one step closer to fulfilling her lifelong
dream of becoming a ballerina. Delia sat at the bench
waiting for the school bus. As the bus rolled down Madison
Avenue, she slipped her hand into her ballet bag to touch
her new shoes. She thought about working hard on her leaps
and jumps. “I want to soar to the moon,” Delia thought.
① hopeful ② bored ③ relaxed
④ worried ⑤ scared
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One reason many people keep delaying things they should
do is that they fear they will do them wrong or poorly, so
they just don’t do them at all. For example, one of the best
ways to write a book is to write it as quickly as possible,
getting your thoughts onto paper without regard to style.
Then, you can go back to revise and polish your writing.
If I only wrote when I knew it would be perfect, I’d still
be working on my first book! Do you have a hard time
relaxing if your house is a mess? Do you beat yourself up
for making mistakes? I’ve got a simple message for you
today: It’s time to let go of your perfectionism. It becomes
a stumbling block that keeps you stuck.
① 잦은 실수는 큰 실수를 유발한다.
② 주변을 정리하는 습관이 중요하다.
③ 책을 집필하기 위해서는 인내가 필요하다.
④ 완벽주의는 일을 추진하는 데 방해가 된다.
⑤ 타인의 입장에서 생각하는 것이 바람직하다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Textiles and clothing have functions that go beyond just
protecting the body. Dress and textiles alike are used as a
means of nonverbal communication. Obvious examples
would be the use of uniforms to communicate a particular
social role and the modern white wedding dress Western
cultures use to mark this rite of passage. Both types of
clothing communicate important information nonverbally to
the onlooker. The female wearing the white dress is about to
be married and change her status and role in society. The
person in the uniform has some specialized function in
society, such as police officer, nurse, or soldier. Therefore, it
can be said that clothing visually communicates information
about group membership and functions as an identity marker.
① educational functions of uniforms
② ways to diversify styles of clothing
③ gender differences in choosing clothing
④ different cultural norms of Western society
⑤ nonverbal communicative functions of clothing
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Traditional consumption was not particularly thrifty. The
concept of thrift emerged out of a more affluent money
culture. In traditional societies where resources continued to
be scarce, consumption was more seasonally and
communally orientated. In years of bountiful crops people
ate heartily, and in lean years they starved. People were not
particularly motivated to produce more goods for
stockpiling, as there was little incentive to do so where
there was little security from raids. When times were good,
celebrations of gluttony were held in the winter season
when stocks could not be refilled. These rituals were more
important than the potential hardships such celebrations
might later bring, as they served to bind people together and
distribute resources. Holiday rituals were typically structured
around cultural practices such as song, dance, theater, and
feasting, and took a great deal of time away from work.
* affluent: 풍부한
** gluttony: 폭식
① What Motivated Traditional Consumption?
② Communal Production of Winter Foods
③ Refilling Stocks: A Survival Necessity
④ How to Survive after a Bad Harvest
⑤ What Constitutes Holiday Rituals?
24. Stonehenge Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① audio guide는 영어로만 제공된다.
② Stonehenge 안내서는 제공되지 않는다.
③ 60세 이상의 노인들은 무료이다.
④ 버스는 오전에만 출발한다.
⑤ 좌석 확보는 온라인 예약으로만 가능하다.
STONEHENGE TOUR
The great and ancient stone circle
of Stonehenge is one of the
greatest wonders of the world.
Enjoy the stones with a fascinating audio-guided tour, in
the language of your choice!
Included Highlights
∙Express Service to Stonehenge by Luxury Bus
∙Stonehenge Guidebook
Prices & Bus Departures
∙Adults: £44.00 Children (3-12): £39.00
Seniors (60 and over) / Students: £42.00
∙Days: Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday
∙Times & Places: 10:00 am, Royal National Hotel
11:00 am, Victoria Station
To secure your seat, please arrive at least 15 minutes
prior to departure or book online 24 hours in advance.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. Kids Library Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
① 6세 미만의 어린이는 어른을 동반해야 한다.
② 캠프는 오후에 진행된다.
③ 도서관 시설의 이용 방법을 배운다.
④ 캠프 참가 사전 등록이 필요하다.
⑤ 캠프 등록비를 내야 한다.
26. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The pie charts above show the Breakdown of Solid
Waste, particularly focusing on Domestic Waste, of the
state of New South Wales, Australia. ① With regard to
Total Urban Solid Waste, the percentage of Commercial &
Industrial is more than twice as high as that of
Construction & Demolition. ② The Domestic category
makes up about a third of Total Urban Solid Waste. ③ Of
Domestic Waste, Food & Garden accounts for the highest
percentage, while the percentage of Ferrous is the lowest.
④ Other Waste is 15% of Domestic Waste, which is five
times higher than the percentage of Plastics. ⑤ Diapers
and Glass each are less than five percent of Domestic
Waste.
* ferrous: 철(쇠)의
27. living rock cactus에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Living rock cactus is one of the most peculiar plants
found in the desert. For most of the year, it blends into
the rocky limestone soils of the Dead Horse Mountains,
Mariscal Mountain, and the hills along the Rio Grande.
You may step on one before you notice it. Spineless and
flat against the ground, it has triangular tubercles that
overlap in a star-shaped pattern. In extremely dry conditions,
living rock cactus is almost invisible: it literally shrinks
into the surrounding rocky soil. Moisture is stored in the
root, and during droughts the root shrinks, dragging the
stem underground. These spineless plants survive by
blending into their native habitat. As added protection,
they store foul-tasting, poisonous alkaloids in their bodies.
* limestone: 석회암
** tubercle: 작은 돌기
① 사막에서 발견되는 특이한 식물 중 하나이다.
② 삼각형 모양의 작은 돌기를 가지고 있다.
③ 매우 건조한 조건에서는 눈에 거의 보이지 않는다.
④ 가뭄 기간에는 뿌리가 팽창한다.
⑤ 독성이 있는 알칼로이드를 체내에 저장한다.
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
The term objectivity is important in measurement because
of the scientific demand that observations be subject to
public verification. A measurement system is objective to
the extent that two observers (A) evaluate / evaluating the
same performance arrive at the same (or very similar)
measurements. For example, using a tape measure to
determine the distance a javelin (B) threw / was thrown yields
very similar results regardless of who reads the tape. By
comparison, evaluation of performances such as diving,
gymnastics, and figure skating is more subjective ─ although
elaborate scoring rules help make (C) it / them more objective.
From the point of view of research in motor behavior, it is
important to use performances in the laboratory for which
the scoring can be as objective as possible.
* javelin: 투창
(A) (B) (C)
① evaluate …… threw …… it
② evaluate …… threw …… them
③ evaluating …… threw …… it
④ evaluating …… was thrown …… them
⑤ evaluating …… was thrown …… it
Kids Library Camp
Premont Library
(July 29 & 30, 2015)
★ A 2-day camp for children aged 6 and over
(Children under 6 must be accompanied by an adult.)
★ Time: 1:00 pm - 6:00 pm, on both days
★ Learn How To:
- use library facilities
- produce online videos
- create your own story books
∙Spaces are limited, so advance registration is required.
Registrations are accepted only at www.premont.lib.
∙No registration fee
∙For further details, contact Ms. Huggon
at huggon@premont.lib or (877) 123-4567.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
A special feature of the real estate rental market is its
tendency to undergo a severe and prolonged contraction
phase, more so than with manufactured products. When the
supply of a manufactured product ① exceeds the demand,
the manufacturer cuts back on output, and the merchant
reduces inventory to balance supply and demand.
However, ② property owners cannot reduce the amount
of space available for rent in their buildings. Space that
was constructed to accommodate business and consumer
needs at the peak of the cycle ③ remains, so vacancy
rates climb and the downward trend becomes more severe.
Rental rates generally do not drop below a certain point,
the ④ maximum that must be charged in order to cover
operating expenses. Some owners will take space off the
market rather than lose money on it. A few, unable to
subsidize the property, will sell at distress prices, and
lenders will repossess others. These may then be placed
on the market at lower rental rates, further ⑤ depressing
the market.
* contraction phase: 경기 수축기(후퇴기)
** distress price: 투매 가격(판매자가 손해를 감수하는 매우 싼 가격)
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Born in Budapest to a family of bankers, von Neumann
was undeniably bright. At age eight, ① he had mastered
calculus. At age twelve, he was reading works aimed at
professional mathematicians. But ② he also loved to
invent mechanical toys and became a child expert on
Byzantine history. When it was time to go off to
university, he agreed to study chemical engineering as a
compromise with his father, who feared that ③ his son
couldn’t make a living as a mathematician. Von Neumann
kept his bargain by enrolling at the University of
Budapest and promptly leaving for Berlin, where he spent
his time doing mathematics, and returning to Budapest at
the end of every semester to take examinations. He
published ④ his second mathematics paper, in which he
gave the modern definition of ordinal numbers, at age
nineteen. By age twenty-five ⑤ he had published ten
major papers; by age thirty, nearly three dozen.
* calculus: 미적분학
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Not all interesting discoveries have an obvious
application. If you believe you have something, but
you’re not sure what exactly it’s going to be good for,
don’t give up. Many innovations languished in labs for
years until they were . Teflon, an
extremely slippery synthetic substance employed as a
coating on cooking utensils, was invented in 1938, but it
didn’t coat its first pan till 1954. The Post-it note was
built on the back of some not-very-good glue. Its
inventor believed it might have value, but it took him
five years to find a potentially profitable use for it. HP
had a breakthrough with a super-accurate thermometer
that was created in the HP Labs. Despite its accuracy,
there was no clear use for the device until it was used to
measure fluctuations in ocean temperature. [3점]
* languish: 시들해지다
① replaced by new ones
② matched to a product
③ backed up by a theory
④ found to be eco-friendly
⑤ tested for their accuracy
32. Empathy is a character trait that we value in ourselves
and in our friends, colleagues, and the professionals who
serve us. The know-how to be empathetic is central to
practical wisdom: unless we can understand how others
think and feel, it’s difficult to know the right thing to do.
But empathy has its dark side: too much understanding and
sensitivity, too much seeing things from the other’s
perspective, can .
Edmund Pellegrino, a scholar of bioethics, explains it like
this: “If a physician identifies too closely as co-sufferer
with the patient, she loses the objectivity essential to the
most precise assessment of what is wrong, of what can be
done, and of what should be done to meet those needs.
Excessive co-suffering also impedes and may even
paralyze the physician into a state of inaction.”
* impede: 방해하다
① block everlasting friendship
② justify doctors’ abuse of power
③ cloud judgment and paralyze choice
④ lead to a hasty but correct diagnosis
⑤ decrease doctors’ compassion for patients
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. Bees have their choice of flora according to color.
Lord Avenbury once made an experiment to see if the
color of flowers attracted bees. Placing honey on slips of
paper of different shades, he found that the insects which
visited them seemed to have a marked preference for
blue, after which came white, yellow, red, green and
orange. This finding should be considered for our
beekeeping planning. If pollination is the prime
consideration of taming bees and if the crop is identified,
while planning.
Let us consider beekeeping near a mustard field. Mustard
gives tiny yellow flowers full of nectar and pollen. For
better yield of mustard seeds, pollination is necessary.
But if there is plenty of blue-colored wild flora nearby,
bees may prefer the blue flowers to mustard. Although
we shall get honey and other products, the objective for
pollination of mustard may be defeated. [3점]
* flora: 식물군
① bees’ preference for color should be put aside
② a greater harvest can be expected near blue flora
③ the quality of honey should be taken into account
④ the abundance of blue flora nearby must be ensured
⑤ the color of other floras nearby should be considered
34. In the mid-1900s, John Kenneth Galbraith shocked the
field of economics when he insisted that consumers do
not merely participate in the marketplace, they are also
the product of the systematic deployment of power
throughout society. Within this deployment of power,
commercial media ensures that consumers adopt values
and beliefs that match the general requirements of the
economy. The individual’s participation in mass behavior
patterns is .
Consumers engage in shared patterns of consumption
because they live within an economic system that
operates as a belief system. It exercises considerable
control over the meaning and value of things. When the
economy functions as a belief system, it establishes
severe limits on a consumer’s free choice. As consumers,
our choices are not entirely our own. Our beliefs, values,
thoughts, and emotions are highly conditioned to match
the needs of the marketplace. [3점]
* deployment: 배치
① not driven by commercial media’s agenda
② a product of unconditioned personal choice
③ not a spontaneous reaction to random forces
④ not affected by the needs of the marketplace
⑤ an outcome irrelevant to the economic system
35. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
We’ve all heard the phrase “the family that plays
together, stays together.” The wisdom in this phrase is
that social play builds ties between people that are
lasting and consequential.
(A) In crying out, the danger-spotting squirrel draws
attention to itself, which may well attract the
predator. Scientists used to think that animals would
risk their lives like this only for kin with whom they
shared common genes.
(B) This wisdom holds outside the human family circle
as well. For example, when one ground squirrel sees
a predator in the distance, it will sound an alarm call
that alerts other squirrels to run for cover. It’s a
risky move.
(C) New evidence suggests, however, that squirrels also
sound alarm calls for former playmates, not genetically
related. These squirrels developed a social resource
while playing ― and these buddies will put their lives
on the line to save their playmates.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[36～37] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
36.
The study also revealed the commanders had given
more attention and praise to the crew members for
whom they had the higher expectations.
Self-fulfilling prophecies can have a positive side. ( ① )
We know that students introduced to their teachers as
“intellectual bloomers” often do better on achievement
tests than do their counterparts who lack such a positive
introduction. ( ② ) In a study of army tank crews, one
set of tank commanders was told that some members of
their assigned crews had exceptional abilities while others
were only average. ( ③ ) In reality, the crew members
had been assigned randomly so that the two test groups
were equal in ability. ( ④ ) The commanders later
reported that the so-called “exceptional” crew members
performed better than the “average” ones. ( ⑤ ) The
self-fulfilling effects in these cases strongly suggest that
managers adopt positive and optimistic approaches toward
others at work.
* bloomer: 재능을 발휘하는 사람
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
But neither are aware of this fact when it comes to
unmarked crosswalks.
Studies do show that motorists are more likely to yield
to pedestrians in marked crosswalks than at unmarked
crosswalks. But as some researchers found, that does not
necessarily make things safer. ( ① ) When they compared
the way pedestrians crossed at both kinds of crosswalks
on roads with considerable traffic volumes, they found that
people at unmarked crosswalks tended to look both ways
more often, waited more often for gaps in traffic, and
crossed the road more quickly. ( ② ) Researchers suspect
that both drivers and pedestrians are more aware that
drivers should yield to pedestrians in marked crosswalks.
( ③ ) Not knowing traffic safety laws, it turns out, is
actually a good thing for pedestrians. ( ④ ) Because they
do not know whether cars are supposed to stop, they act
more cautiously. ( ⑤ ) Marked crosswalks, by contrast,
may give pedestrians an unrealistic picture of their own
safety. [3점]
[38～39] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
38. Some researchers investigated the effects of different
media on children’s ability to produce imaginative responses.
In one study, children in grades one through four were
separated randomly into two groups and presented with
the same fictional story. One group listened to the story
via radio, while the other group watched the story on a
television. ① Afterward, all of the children were asked
what they thought would happen next in the story. ② The
researchers rated children’s imaginativeness by recording
the novel elements (such as characters, setting, dialogue,
and feelings) they used in their responses. ③ Some
novelists prefer to include as many characters as possible
in their stories. ④ The children who listened to the radio
produced more imaginative responses, whereas the children
who watched the television produced more words that
repeated the original story. ⑤ Media scholars have used
this study to illustrate the “visualization hypothesis,” which
states that children’s exposure to ready-made visual images
restricts their ability to generate novel images of their own.
39. One of the many strengths of the African American
community is an intrinsic support for the athletic endeavors
of African American girls and women. ① Since African
American culture appreciates a greater flexibility of gender
roles and accepts a broader range of gender-appropriate
behaviors, African American women are not as bound as
white women by gender role stereotypes. ② Athletics for
girls and women is not perceived as conflicting with an African
American female’s gender role. ③ Hall and Bower’s study
of African American females found that African American
women defined themselves as “softly strong” ― owning
both strength and femininity without conflict. ④ African
American males have played an increasingly important role
in global politics. ⑤Welcome support from the African
American community has energized many African American
girls and women to participate in sports.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Experts have found that reading classical texts benefits
the mind by catching the reader’s attention and triggering
moments of self-reflection. The brain activity of volunteers
was monitored as they read classical works. These same
texts were then “translated” into more straightforward,
modern language and again the readers’ brains were
monitored as they read the words. Scans showed that the
more challenging prose and poetry set off far more
electrical activity in the brain than the more pedestrian
versions. Scientists were able to study the brain activity as
it responded to each word and record how it lit up as the
readers encountered unusual words, surprising phrases or
difficult sentence structures. This lighting up lasts long
enough to shift the brain into a higher gear, encouraging
further reading. The research also found that reading the
more challenging version of poetry, in particular, increases
activity in the right hemisphere of the brain, helping the
readers to reflect on and reevaluate their own experiences
in light of what they have read. The academics said this
meant the classics were more useful than self-help books.
󰀻
Original versions of classical texts are helpful to readers
because they contain (A) language that inspires
further reading and (B) readers’ self-reflection.
(A) (B)
① challenging …… distorts
② demanding …… activates
③ comprehensible …… increases
④ difficult …… hinders
⑤ accessible …… stimulates
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Organisms must compete for resources not only with
members of their own species, but with members of
other species. When two species use the same resource
and the resource is scarce, the species must compete just
as if they were members of the same population. One
of the two species usually turns out to be better at the
competition. If two species eat exactly the same food, for
example, one of the two will be better at catching it.
Unless something interferes, the inferior competitor loses
out and the competitively superior species takes over.
When one species eliminates another by outcompeting it,
it is called competitive exclusion.
Sometimes a competitively superior species is prevented
from excluding poorer competitors. Periodic disturbances
such as severe storms, battering by drifting logs, or
underwater landslides can reduce the population of a
dominant competitor and give other species a chance.
Furthermore, which species is competitively superior
sometimes depends on the conditions. On rocky shores
in tropical Hong Kong, for example, foliose (leaf-like)
algae are the dominant seaweeds during the relatively
cool winter. In the summer heat, these forms die out
and are replaced by more resistant encrusting algae.
Seasonal variation thus prevents either group from
excluding the other, and there is a
between the competing species.
* encrust: 외피를 형성하다
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Innate Advantages of the Strong
② How Are the Superior Determined?
③ Population Growth in Marine Life
④ Why Do Species Avoid Competing?
⑤ Every Aspect of a Species’ Lifestyle
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① shifting balance ② fixed hierarchy
③ strong dependency ④ lasting collaboration
⑤ one-way relationship
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Jim Nelson, a junior at Manti High School, was an
outstanding athlete. He had just made the school
basketball team, one of the best in the state. But on
October 23, 1996, most of (a) his athletic future was
suddenly taken away from him. Jim was riding his
bicycle at night to visit his friend. The road was very
steep in some places. It was very dark and difficult to see.
(B)
Because of his injury, Jim wasn’t able to play on the
basketball team during the rest of that year, but the
coach did make him equipment manager so that he
could come and practice. All summer long in 1997, each
and every night, (b) he practiced making left-handed
baskets. When the next season arrived, Jim was ready to
try out for the team ― and he made it again!
(C)
As he came around a sloping curve on his bicycle, Jim
hit a car parked on the side of the road. (c) He ended
up in the hospital. Besides bad cuts on his head, he
broke his right arm and was in a cast for two months.
Jim’s doctor gave him a series of tests. The doctor
concluded that (d) he had suffered nerve damage and
that he might never regain the full use of his right arm.
(D)
Jim never became a starter, but he was always the
first substitute to go in the game. Jim got a chance to
play in the last 30 seconds of the championship game
when a starting player sprained (e) his ankle. With 10
seconds left, Jim balanced the ball in his left hand and
took the shot. The crowd was deathly quiet until ―
swish! He made the three-point-shot left-handed! Jim
won not only the game but also the hearts of his
teammates for proving that with determination, no
obstacle is too great.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 Jim에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Manti 고등학교의 뛰어난 운동선수였다.　　　
② 부상당한 해의 남은 경기에는 선수로 참여하지 못했다.
③ 자전거를 타고 가다가 주차된 차에 부딪쳤다.
④ 챔피언 결정전에 처음부터 출전했다.
⑤ 왼손으로 3점 슛을 성공시켰다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
1
8
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지 1
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sorry. I already ate dinner.
② No. I’ve never met him before.
③ Sure. Thanks for the invitation.
④ Yes. I bought a box of chocolates.
⑤ Good. I hate working on weekends.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No problem. I’ll pick up your daughter.
② You’re welcome. It’s my pleasure.
③ Wow, this winter is really cold.
④ I agree. The timing isn’t good.
⑤ Okay, let me take a look.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 교복 물려주기를 권장하려고
② 기부 행사 참여를 독려하려고
③ 생활 용품 절약을 장려하려고
④ 학교 식당 공사를 안내하려고
⑤ 학부모 간담회 일정을 공지하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 수면 문제를 해결하는 방법
② 휴대전화와 업무 효율성의 관계
③ 미디어 기기가 학습에 미치는 영향
④ 규칙적인 운동의 중요성
⑤ 충분한 낮잠의 필요성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 연출가 － 배우 ② 작곡가 － 가수
③ 사회자 － 요리사 ④ 식당 지배인 － 고객
⑤ 농장 주인 － 도매업자
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to remove election posters
② to take the adviser position
③ to cancel the student meeting
④ to speak out against school violence
⑤ to register as a presidential candidate
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 야구 경기를 보러 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 독감에 걸려서
② 비행기를 놓쳐서
③ 동생을 돌봐야 해서
④ 회의에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 입장권을 구할 수 없어서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $9 ② $16 ③ $18 ④ $20 ⑤ $27
10. 대화를 듣고, 미용실에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을
고르시오.
① 가게 이름 ② 위치 ③ 남자 이발 비용
④ 영업시간 ⑤ 미용사 이름
11. science essay contest에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 고등학생이 참가할 수 있다.
② 에세이 주제가 두 가지이다.
③ 에세이 분량에 제한이 있다.
④ 온라인으로만 에세이 제출을 허용한다.
⑤ 참가자 전원에게 후원 기관 견학 기회를 준다.
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 패키지
상품을 고르시오.
Attraction Packages at Grandlife Amusement Park
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Set a time limit when making a presentation.
② The more knowledge, the better the interview.
③ The company buys your creativity, not your image.
④ Interviewing is no more than expressing yourself.
⑤ Too much confidence in your vision doesn’t help.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I’ll write it down for you then.
② You should share it with others.
③ You prepared a lot for the event.
④ I can memorize your phone number.
⑤ Let’s go to the history museum now.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Peter가 Sandra에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Peter: Sandra,
① I think you need to take a break for a while.
② I recommend you return your book soon.
③ I’d suggest changing where you study.
④ you’d better review what you learned.
⑤ you should’ve slept more last night.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① consequences of communication problems
② difficulties of managing a relationship
③ various merits of having hobbies
④ causes of conflict within a family
⑤ ways of making peace with family members
17. 언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① a letter ② a picture ③ cookies
④ earrings ⑤ flowers
18. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One difference between winners and losers is how they handle
losing. Even for the best companies and most accomplished
professionals, long track records of success are punctuated by
slips, slides, and mini-turnarounds. Even the team that wins
the game might make mistakes and lag behind for part of it.
That’s why the ability to recover quickly is so important.
Troubles are ubiquitous. Surprises can fall from the sky like
volcanic ash and appear to change everything. That’s why one
prominent scholar said, “Anything can look like a failure in
the middle.” Thus, a key factor in high achievement is
bouncing back from the low points.
① 경영의 전문화는 일류 기업의 조건이다.
② 위기 관리에는 전문가의 조언이 필요하다.
③ 합리적 소비는 필요와 욕구의 구분에서 비롯된다.
④ 폭넓은 인간 관계는 성공의 필수 요소이다.
⑤ 실패를 빨리 극복하는 것이 성공의 열쇠이다.
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
As I walked to the train station, I felt the warm sun on my
back. I caught my train on time. It arrived at my destination ten
minutes early, which was perfect, as I was due to present my
new idea to the company at 10 a.m. The presentation went better
than expected, and my manager seemed particularly pleased.
Later that day, my manager called me into her office. She smiled
at me and said, “James, you’ve been with us for six years now.
How would you feel if I were to offer you the Sales Director
position in London?” Sales Director in London! Wow! This was
a dream come true for me. I couldn’t believe what I had just heard!
① joyful ② jealous ③ outraged
④ confused ⑤ indifferent
[20～21] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
20. Many disciplines are better learned by entering into the
doing than by mere abstract study. This is often the case with
the most abstract as well as the seemingly more practical
disciplines. For example, within the philosophical disciplines,
logic must be learned through the use of examples and actual
problem solving. Only after some time and struggle does the
student begin to develop the insights and intuitions that enable
him to see the centrality and relevance of this mode of
thinking. This learning by doing is essential in many of the
sciences. For instance, only after a good deal of observation do
the sparks in the bubble chamber become recognizable as the
specific movements of identifiable particles.
① history of science education
② limitations of learning strategies
③ importance of learning by doing
④ effects of intuition on scientific discoveries
⑤ difference between philosophy and science
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3
8
21. The most normal and competent child encounters what
seem like insurmountable problems in living. But by playing
them out, he may become able to cope with them in a
step-by-step process. He often does so in symbolic ways that
are hard for even him to understand, as he is reacting to inner
processes whose origin may be buried deep in his
unconscious. This may result in play that makes little sense to
us at the moment, since we do not know the purposes it
serves. When there is no immediate danger, it is usually best
to approve of the child’s play without interfering. Efforts to
assist him in his struggles, while well intentioned, may divert
him from seeking and eventually finding the solution that will
serve him best.
① dangers of playing violent games to mental health
② beneficial influence of playing outdoors in childhood
③ children’s play as problem solving with minimal intervention
④ necessity of intervening in disputes between siblings
⑤ parental roles in children’s physical development
[22～23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. At some time in their lives, most people pause to reflect on
their own moral principles and on the practical implications of
those principles, and they sometimes think about what
principles people should have or which moral standards can
be best justified. When a person accepts a moral principle,
naturally the person believes the principle is important and
well justified. But there is more to moral principles than that.
When a principle is part of a person’s moral code, that person
is strongly motivated toward the conduct required by the
principle, and against behavior that conflicts with that
principle. The person will tend to feel guilty when his or her
own conduct violates that principle and to disapprove of
others whose behavior conflicts with it. Likewise, the person
will tend to hold in esteem those whose conduct shows an
abundance of the motivation required by the principle.
① Feeling Guilty? Check Your Self-Esteem First
② Do Not Let Your Moral Principles Change!
③ Moral Integrity: A Principle of Philosophy
④ How Do People Form Their Personalities?
⑤ Moral Principles: Guiding Our Conduct
23. The key to successful risk taking is to understand that the
actions you’re taking should be the natural next step. One of
the mistakes we often make when confronting a risk situation
is our tendency to focus on the end result. Skiers who are
unsure of themselves often do this. They’ll go to the edge of a
difficult slope, look all the way down to the bottom, and
determine that the slope is too steep for them to try. The ones
that decide to make it change their focus by analyzing what
they need to do to master the first step, like getting through
the first mogul on the hill. Once they get there, they
concentrate on the next mogul, and over the course of the run,
they end up at the bottom of what others thought was an
impossible mountain.
* mogul: 모굴(스키의 활주 사면에 있는 단단한 눈 더미)
① Separating the Possible from the Impossible
② Focus on the Next Step, Not the Final Result
③ Start with Ultimate Goals in Mind!
④ The Wonders of Committed Efforts
⑤ Success Through Risk Avoidance
24. Georg Dionysius Ehret에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
The 18th century is called the Golden Age of botanical
painting, and Georg Dionysius Ehret is often praised as the
greatest botanical artist of the time. Born in Heidelberg,
Germany, he was the son of a gardener who taught him much
about art and nature. As a young man, Ehret traveled around
Europe, largely on foot, observing plants and developing his
artistic skills. In Holland, he became acquainted with the
Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus. Through his collaborations with
Linnaeus and others, Ehret provided illustrations for a number
of significant horticultural publications. Ehret’s reputation for
scientific accuracy gained him many commissions from wealthy
patrons, particularly in England, where he eventually settled.
* horticultural: 원예(학)의
① 18세기의 가장 위대한 식물 화가로서 칭송받는다.
② 정원사의 아들이었다.
③ 젊은 시절 주로 마차로 유럽을 여행하였다.
④ 다수의 원예 출판물에 삽화를 제공하였다.
⑤ 영국에 정착하였다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4
8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentages of Americans aged
12-17 who posted certain types of personal information on
social media sites in 2006 and in 2012. ① The year 2012 saw
an overall percentage increase in each category of posted
personal information. ② In both years, the percentage of the
young Americans who posted photos of themselves was the
highest of all the categories. ③ In 2006, the percentage of
those who posted city or town names was higher than that of
those who posted school names. ④ Regarding posted email
addresses, the percentage of 2012 was three times higher than
that of 2006. ⑤ Compared to 2006, 2012 recorded an eighteen
percent increase in the category of cell phone numbers.
26. Short Film Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 교수들이 제작한 영화가 상영된다.
② 오전에 세 시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 영화 전공 학생에게만 입장료를 할인해 준다.
④ 입장권은 환불이 가능하다.
⑤ 무료 음료가 입장료에 포함된다.
27. After-School Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
① 지역의 십 대들을 위한 무료 프로그램이다.
② 신청자가 20명 미만인 수업은 취소된다.
③ 모든 수업은 Simpson Building에서 진행된다.
④ 등록 신청서는 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.
⑤ 추가 정보는 웹사이트나 이메일을 이용하면 된다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
During the early stages when the aquaculture industry was
rapidly expanding, mistakes were made and these were costly
both in terms of direct losses and in respect of the industry’s
image. High-density rearing led to outbreaks of infectious
diseases that in some cases ① devastated not just the caged
fish, but local wild fish populations too. The negative impact
on local wildlife inhabiting areas ② close to the fish farms
continues to be an ongoing public relations problem for the
industry. Furthermore, a general lack of knowledge and
insufficient care being taken when fish pens were initially
constructed ③ meaning that pollution from excess feed and
fish waste created huge barren underwater deserts. These were
costly lessons to learn, but now stricter regulations are in
place to ensure that fish pens are placed in sites ④ where there
is good water flow to remove fish waste. This, in addition to
other methods that decrease the overall amount of uneaten
food, ⑤ has helped aquaculture to clean up its act.
AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM
December 1, 2014－January 30, 2015
Are you looking for fun and exciting classes?
Come on down to the Green Hills Community Center to
check out our FREE program for local teens!
Classes
∙Art, Music, Taekwondo
∙Classes with fewer than 20 applicants will be canceled.
Time & Place
∙The program will run from Monday to Friday
(5:00 pm to 7:00 pm).
∙All classes will take place in the Simpson Building.
How to sign up
∙Registration forms must be sent by email to the address
below by 6:00 pm, November 28. Please download the
forms from our website at www.greenhills.org.
For additional information, please visit our website
or send an email to bill@greenhills.org.
SHORT FILM FESTIVAL
We will be hosting nine short films, which were written,
directed, acted and produced by students from the College
of Performing Arts & Film, Pamil University.
∙Date: Friday, November 21, 2014
∙Time: 7:00 pm－10:00 pm
∙Place: Pamil Auditorium, Pamil University
∙Price:
$10 (general admission)
$5 (discount for all university students with a valid ID)
- Tickets can be purchased from the student union
office from Monday, November 17, 2014.
- All tickets are non-refundable.
- FREE beverage included in ticket price
∙For more information, please call the student union
office at (343) 777-8338.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5
8
29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Nancy was struggling to see the positive when ① her teen
daughter was experiencing a negative perspective on her life
and abilities. In her desire to parent intentionally, ② she went
into her daughter’s room and noted one positive accomplishment
she had observed. “I know you’ve been having a hard time
lately, and you aren’t feeling really good or positive about
your life. But you did a great job cleaning up your room
today, and ③ I know that must have been a big effort for you.”
The next day, to Nancy’s surprise, the teen girl seemed
somewhat cheerful. In passing, ④ she said, “Mom, thanks for
saying the positive thing about me yesterday. I was feeling so
down and couldn’t think of anything good about myself. After
⑤ you said that positive thing, it helped me see one good
quality in myself, and I’ve been holding onto those words.”
30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
While the eye sees at the surface, the ear tends to penetrate
below the surface. Joachim-Ernst Berendt points out that the ear
is the only sense that (A) fuses / replaces an ability to measure
with an ability to judge. We can discern different colors, but
we can give a precise number to different sounds. Our eyes do
not let us perceive with this kind of (B) diversity / precision . An
unmusical person can recognize an octave and, perhaps once
instructed, a quality of tone, that is, a C or an F-sharp. Berendt
points out that there are few ‘acoustical illusions’ ― something
sounding like something that in fact it is not ― while there are
many optical illusions. The ears do not lie. The sense of
hearing gives us a remarkable connection with the invisible,
underlying order of things. Through our ears we gain access to
vibration, which (C) underlies / undermines everything around
us. The sense of tone and music in another’s voice gives us an
enormous amount of information about that person, about her
stance toward life, about her intentions.
* acoustical: 청각의
(A) (B) (C)
① fuses …… precision …… undermines
② replaces …… diversity …… underlies
③ fuses …… diversity …… undermines
④ replaces …… precision …… underlies
⑤ fuses …… precision …… underlies
[31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The concept of humans doing multiple things at a time has
been studied by psychologists since the 1920s, but the term
“multitasking” didn’t exist until the 1960s. It was used to
describe computers, not people. Back then, ten megahertz was
so fast that a new word was needed to describe a computer’s
ability to quickly perform many tasks. In retrospect, they
probably made a poor choice, for the expression “multitasking”
is inherently deceptive. Multitasking is about multiple tasks
alternately sharing one resource (the CPU), but in time the
context was flipped and it became interpreted to mean multiple
tasks being done simultaneously by one resource (a person). It
was a clever turn of phrase that’s misleading, for even
computers can process only one piece of code at a time. When
they “multitask,” they switch back and forth, alternating their
attention until both tasks are done. The speed with which
computers tackle multiple tasks that
everything happens at the same time, so comparing computers
to humans can be confusing. [3점]
① expels the myth ② feeds the illusion
③ conceals the fact ④ proves the hypothesis
⑤ blurs the conviction
32. My friend was disappointed that scientific progress has not
cured the world’s ills by abolishing wars and starvation; that
gross human inequality is still widespread; that happiness is
not universal. My friend made a common mistake ― a basic
misunderstanding in the nature of knowledge. Knowledge is
amoral ― not immoral but morality neutral. It can be used for
any purpose, but many people assume it will be used to further
their favorite hopes for society ― and this is the fundamental flaw.
Knowledge of the world is one thing; its uses create a separate
issue. To be disappointed that our progress in understanding
has not remedied the social ills of the world is a legitimate
view, but .
To argue that knowledge is not progressing because of the
African or Middle Eastern conflicts misses the point. There is
nothing inherent in knowledge that dictates any specific social
or moral application. [3점]
① to confuse this with the progress of knowledge is absurd
② to know the nature of knowledge is to practice its moral value
③ to remove social inequality is the inherent purpose of knowledge
④ to accumulate knowledge is to enhance its social application
⑤ to make science progress is to make it cure social ills
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6
8
33. According to a renowned French scholar, the growth in the
size and complexity of human populations was the driving
force in the evolution of science. Early, small communities had
to concentrate all their physical and mental effort on survival;
their thoughts were focused on food and religion. As
communities became larger, some people had time to reflect
and debate. They found that they could understand and predict
events better if they reduced passion and prejudice, replacing
these with observation and inference. But while a large
population may have been necessary, in itself it was not
sufficient for science to germinate. Some empires were big,
but the rigid social control required to hold an empire together
was not beneficial to science, just as it was not beneficial to
reason. The early nurturing and later flowering of science
to support
original thought and freewheeling incentive. The rise in
commerce and the decline of authoritarian religion allowed
science to follow reason in seventeenth-century Europe. [3점]
* germinate: 싹트다, 발아하다
① prompted small communities to adopt harsh social norms
② resulted from passion and enthusiasm rather than inference
③ occurred in large communities with strict hierarchical structures
④ were solely attributed to efforts of survival in a small community
⑤ required a large and loosely structured, competitive community
34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
New media can be defined by four characteristics
simultaneously: they are media at the turn of the 20th and 21st
centuries which are both integrated and interactive and use
digital code and hypertext as technical means. It follows that
their most common alternative names are multimedia,
interactive media and digital media. By using this definition,
it is easy to identify media as old or new. (A) ,
traditional television is integrated as it contains images, sound
and text, but it is not interactive or based on digital code. The
plain old telephone was interactive, but not integrated as it
only transmitted speech and sounds and it did not work with
digital code. In contrast, the new medium of interactive
television adds interactivity and digital code. (B) ,
the new generations of mobile or fixed telephony are fully
digitalized and integrated as they add text, pictures or video
and they are connected to the Internet.
(A) (B)
① For example …… Additionally
② Nevertheless …… In other words
③ Therefore …… Additionally
④ For example …… In other words
⑤ Nevertheless …… Consequently
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
A currently popular attitude is to blame technology or
technologists for having brought on the environmental
problems we face today, and thus to try to slow technological
advance by blocking economic growth. We believe this view
to be thoroughly misguided. ① If technology produced
automobiles that pollute the air, it is because pollution was not
recognized as a problem which engineers had to consider in
their designs. ② Solar energy can be a practical alternative
energy source for us in the foreseeable future. ③ Obviously,
technology that produces pollution is generally cheaper, but
now that it has been decided that cleaner cars are wanted, less
polluting cars will be produced; cars which scarcely pollute at
all could even be made. ④ This last option, however, would
require several years and much investment. ⑤ Although
technology is responsive to the will of the people, it can
seldom respond instantaneously and is never free.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
The impact of color has been studied for decades. For
example, in a factory, the temperature was maintained at
72℉ and the walls were painted a cool blue-green. The
employees complained of the cold.
(A) The psychological effects of warm and cool hues seem to
be used effectively by the coaches of the Notre Dame
football team. The locker rooms used for half-time breaks
were reportedly painted to take advantage of the
emotional impact of certain hues.
(B) The home-team room was painted a bright red, which
kept team members excited or even angered. The
visiting-team room was painted a blue-green, which had a
calming effect on the team members. The success of this
application of color can be noted in the records set by
Notre Dame football teams.
(C) The temperature was maintained at the same level, but the
walls were painted a warm coral. The employees stopped
complaining about the temperature and reported they
were quite comfortable.
* hue: 색조, 색상
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7
8
37.
Food plays a large part in how much you enjoy the
outdoors. The possibilities are endless, so you can
constantly vary your diet.
(A) They walk only a few miles each day and may use the
same campsite for several nights. Survival eaters eat
some dry cereal for breakfast, and are up and walking
within minutes of waking.
(B) Wilderness dining has two extremes: gourmet eaters and
survival eaters. The first like to make camp at lunchtime
so they have several hours to set up field ovens; they bake
cakes and bread and cook multi-course dinners.
(C) They walk dozens of miles every day; lunch is a series of
cold snacks eaten on the move. Dinner consists of a
freeze-dried meal, “cooked” by pouring hot water into the
package.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
The researchers had made this happen by lengthening the
period of daylight to which the peach trees on whose roots
the insects fed were exposed.
Exactly how cicadas keep track of time has always intrigued
researchers, and it has always been assumed that the insects
must rely on an internal clock. Recently, however, one group
of scientists working with the 17-year cicada in California
have suggested that the nymphs use an external cue and that
they can count. ( ① ) For their experiments they took
15-year-old nymphs and moved them to an experimental
enclosure. ( ② ) These nymphs should have taken a further
two years to emerge as adults, but in fact they took just one
year. ( ③ ) By doing this, the trees were “tricked” into
flowering twice during the year rather than the usual once.
( ④ ) Flowering in trees coincides with a peak in amino acid
concentrations in the sap that the insects feed on. ( ⑤ ) So it
seems that the cicadas keep track of time by counting the
peaks.
* nymph: 애벌레
** sap: 수액
39.
They also rated how generally extroverted those fake
extroverts appeared, based on their recorded voices and
body language.
Some years ago, a psychologist named Richard Lippa called
a group of introverts to his lab and asked them to act like
extroverts while pretending to teach a math class. ( ① ) Then
he and his team, with video cameras in hand, measured the
length of their strides, the amount of eye contact they made
with their “students,” the percentage of time they spent
talking, and the volume of their speech. ( ② ) Then Lippa
did the same thing with actual extroverts and compared the
results. ( ③ ) He found that although the latter group came
across as more extroverted, some of the fake extroverts were
surprisingly convincing. ( ④ ) It seems that most of us
know how to fake it to some extent. ( ⑤ ) Whether or not
we’re aware that the length of our strides and the amount of
time we spend talking and smiling mark us as introverts and
extroverts, we know it unconsciously. [3점]
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Plato and Tolstoy both assume that it can be firmly
established that certain works have certain effects. Plato is
sure that the representation of cowardly people makes us
cowardly; the only way to prevent this effect is to suppress
such representations. Tolstoy is confident that the artist
who sincerely expresses feelings of pride will pass those
feelings on to us; we can no more escape than we could
escape an infectious disease. In fact, however, the effects
of art are neither so certain nor so direct. People vary a
great deal both in the intensity of their response to art and
in the form which that response takes. Some people may
indulge fantasies of violence by watching a film instead of
working out those fantasies in real life. Others may be
disgusted by even glamorous representations of violence.
Still others may be left unmoved, neither attracted nor
disgusted.
󰀻
Although Plato and Tolstoy claim that works of art have
a(n) (A) impact on people’s feelings, the degrees
and forms of people’s actual responses (B) greatly.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① unavoidable …… differ ② direct …… converge
③ temporary …… fluctuate ④ unexpected …… converge
⑤ favorable …… differ
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Increased size affects group life in a number of ways. There
is evidence that larger groups (five or six members) are more
productive than smaller groups (two or three members).
Members of larger groups tend to offer more suggestions than
members of smaller groups, and although they seem to reach
less agreement, they also show less tension. These differences
may reflect the greater need of larger groups to solve
organizational problems. Members may realize that their
behavior must become more goal-directed, since it is unlikely
that they can coordinate their actions without making a special
effort to do so. Larger groups also put more pressure on their
members to conform. In such groups, it is harder for everyone
to take part equally in discussions or to have the same amount
of influence on decisions.
There is evidence that groups with an even number of
members differ from groups with an odd number of members.
The former disagree more than the latter and suffer more
deadlocks as a result. Groups with an even number of
members may split into halves. This is impossible in groups
with an odd number of members ― one side always has a
numerical advantage. According to some researchers, the
number five has special significance. Groups of this size
usually the problems we have just outlined.
Moreover, they are not plagued by the fragility and tensions
found in groups of two or three. Groups of five rate high in
member satisfaction; because of the odd number of members,
deadlocks are unlikely when disagreements occur.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Why the Number of Group Members Counts
② Individuality vs. Collectivity in the Workplace
③ Equal Opportunities: Toward Maximum Satisfaction
④ How to Cope with Conflicts in Groups
⑤ Agreement on Group Size Pays Off!
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① probe ② escape ③ mirror
④ trigger ⑤ escalate
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
In my office, I have a framed letter from a couple of children
I have never met. The letter holds a special significance for me.
It reads, “Dear Dr. Brown, thanks for teaching Mr. Wills to
teach Tisha and Kelly.” Mr. Wills is Jeremy Wills, and (a) he is
one of my former students. A few years back, he took my
positive psychology class in college.
(B)
Before long, the reality hit Jeremy hard. Even after
spending many hours each day preparing lesson plans, it
became clear that his methods were not working. One of the
worst moments was when (b) he distributed a math test.
Many students didn’t even look at the exam. They just put
their heads on their desks and slept. Jeremy became so
stressed that he even dreaded going into his classroom.
(C)
After graduation, Jeremy joined an organization that
recruits future leaders to teach in low-income communities.
(c) He was assigned to a small school in a poor rural county
in North Carolina. Later, his assistant principal took note of
Jeremy’s high expectations and asked him to take over (d) his
math class. He took charge of about a dozen failing “special ed”
kids, and Tisha and Kelly were among them. His idealism
ran high, and he thought he would be able to magically fix
all of their problems.
(D)
Jeremy knew something had to change. (e) He then thought
back to my class, remembering how negative emotions can
drag you down, leaving positive emotions unnoticed. That’s
when he decided to focus more on building positive attitudes
within the classroom. He borrowed lessons from my positive
psychology class and even mentioned my name to his students.
As the students’ attitudes became more optimistic, their
confidence with math grew too. At the end of the school year,
80 percent of Jeremy’s students passed the state’s math test.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 Jeremy에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 대학에서 긍정 심리학을 수강했다.
② 많은 시간을 들여 수업 계획서를 준비했다.
③ 스트레스로 인해 교실에 들어가기를 두려워했다.
④ 저소득 지역에서 가르칠 미래 지도자를 모집하는 단체에 가입했다.
⑤ 학년말에 그의 학생의 80퍼센트가 수학 시험에 불합격했다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1 8
2015학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역 1
제 3 교시
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No. I don’t like the animal.
② Thanks. You saved my dog.
③ Okay. I’ll take care of your pet.
④ Sorry. I don’t have time to volunteer.
⑤ Of course. They need more volunteers.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Singing makes me feel better.
② I can’t believe I passed the audition.
③ Just sing the song that you really like.
④ Please let me know how to be a good singer.
⑤ I don’t think the song is good for the audition.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고
르시오.
① 학생회 선거 참여를 독려하려고
② 스승의 날 행사 아이디어를 공모하려고
③ 감사 엽서 쓰기 행사 참여를 권유하려고
④　건의함 이용 방법을 안내하려고
⑤ 교실의 청결 유지를 당부하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 온실 재배의 이점
② 제철 과일의 효능
③ 친환경 병충해 예방법
④ 겨울철 식물 관리 요령
⑤ 농산물 유통 구조 개선의 필요성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 청소 업체 사장- 직원
② 인테리어 업자- 집주인
③ 부동산 중개업자- 고객
④ 페인트 가게 주인- 점원
⑤ 이삿짐 센터 직원- 의뢰인
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고
르시오.
①
③
④ ⑤
②
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to put up paintings on the wall
② to recommend some good music
③ to take brochures to the gallery
④ to buy some cookies and drinks
⑤ to send out invitations to her friends
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 식료품 가게에 다시 가려는 이유를 고르
시오.
① 잘못 구매한 식품을 환불하려고
② 두고 온 소시지를 찾아오려고
③ 영수증을 다시 발급　받으려고
④ 사은품을 받으려고
⑤ 고기를 더 사려고
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $6 ② $8 ③ $10 ④ $12 ⑤ $14
10. 대화를 듣고, 중고 서점에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것
을 고르시오.
① 위치 ② 매장 규모 ③ 개점 시간
④ 회원 혜택 ⑤ 배송료
11. Open Art Class에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것
을 고르시오.
① 지역 주민을 대상으로 한다.
② 등록비는 없다.
③ 세 시간 동안 진행된다.
④ 참가 인원 제한이 없다.
⑤ 신청은 온라인으로 해야 한다.
영어 영역 2
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
2 8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 유아용 변
기를 고르시오.
Potty Chairs
Model Design Backrest Music Price ① B-100 bear × × $34
② P-100 puppy ○ × $36
③ P-200 puppy ○ ○ $39
④ K-100 kitten × ○ $37
⑤ K-200 kitten ○ ○ $41
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① The cake I ordered will be here in time.
② I think it’s worth trying for our son, though.
③ Thank you for inviting me to your cooking class.
④ Please tell me what the cake I made tastes like.
⑤ Our son will be able to be a good cook.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Your tips surely will give me more time for reading.
② Playing sports is as important as reading books.
③ If you want, I’ll return the books to the library.
④ I’m planning to donate my old books to charity.
⑤ I forgot the due date of my book review.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jane이 Mr. Penn에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Jane:
① I’m so happy I made new friends on the field trip.
② I’m sorry, but I cannot participate in the field trip.
③ I’ll hand in the field trip report as soon as possible.
④ I keep in touch with old friends in my previous school.
⑤ I’d like you to give me some advice about the field trip.
[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① disadvantages of highheeled
shoes
② importance of warming up before working out
③ differences between indoor and outdoor sports
④ effect of regular exercise on the muscular system
⑤ need for wearing different shoes for different sports
17. 언급된 운동이 아닌 것은?
① running ② tennis ③ aerobics
④ basketball ⑤ badminton
이제 듣기·말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
We all have a tendency to look at our own flaws with a
magnifying glass. If you continually tell yourself that this or
that part of you is not up to standard, how can you expect
it to get any better? Focus on the things you like about
yourself. You will see how much better it feels to praise
yourself rather than put yourself down. With this good
feeling, you can do more for yourself and others than you
could ever do with the negative energy of selfcriticism.
Choose to see the good. The choice is yours alone.
① 자신의 결점보다는 좋은 점을 찾으라.
② 결점을 지적받으면 고치려고 노력하라.
③ 다른 사람이 하는 칭찬에 자만하지 말라.
④ 완벽함을 추구하기보다는 과정을 즐기라.
⑤ 다른 사람의 비판을 자기 발전의 계기로 삼으라.
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
I went to a local hardware store and purchased my first
barbeque. I didn’t consider the size of the box relative to
the size of my tiny car. However I tried, it wouldn’t fit.
Being new to the area, I didn’t have many people I could
call to help. As the store clerk and I stood in front of the
store scratching our heads, a man in a big pickup truck
pulled up in front of us. He too was picking up a barbeque
and without being prompted, offered to throw mine next to
his in the back of his truck and follow me home. He
wouldn’t even let me tip him. He just pulled up in my
driveway, unloaded the box, waved, and quietly drove away.
Mister, you made my week!
① worried → regretful ② frustrated → grateful
③ jealous → relieved ④ relaxed → nervous
⑤ excited → disappointed
[20 ~ 21] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
20. Soil erosion is not new. What is new is the rate of
erosion. New soil forms when the weathering of rock
exceeds losses from erosion. Throughout most of the earth’s
geological history, the result was a gradual, longterm
buildup of soil that could support vegetation. The vegetation
in turn reduced erosion and facilitated the accumulation of
topsoil. At some recent point in history, this relationship
was reversed — with soil losses from wind and water erosion
exceeding new soil formation. The world now is losing soil
at a rate of billions of tons per year, and this is reducing
the earth’s productivity. In many countries, the loss of soil
is decreasing the productivity of the land. [3점]
① excessive soil erosion and its negative effect
② increased natural rate of topsoil accumulation
③ roles of water in enhancing soil productivity
④ ways to enhance the economic value of soil
⑤　factors that facilitate fertile soil formation
영어 영역
3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
3 8
21. Researcher Jack Greenberg studied how employees from
various career sectors perceived their performance
evaluation. He found that, regardless of the industry, it was
incredibly important for employees to feel that they were
active participants in the evaluation process. The employees
were more likely to feel that the process was fair when
supervisors requested their input prior to an evaluation and
used it during the process, when there was twoway
communication during the evaluation interviews, and when
the employees had the chance to challenge the evaluation. In
other words, if the employees were involved in their
evaluation, they felt it was fairer.
① employees’ key roles in the company’s future growth
② effective strategies for selecting competent employees
③ evaluation as a means to enhance employees’ performance
④ importance of involving employees in the evaluation
process
⑤ obstacles to the communication between supervisors and
employees
[22 ~ 23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. The body is like a symphony where thousands of
metabolic actions are orchestrated into harmony through the
constant finetuning
of conscious (e.g. exercise) and
subconscious (e.g. digestion) instructions. When the harmony
is broken, the body sends us information, signals and
symptoms, in very direct and obvious ways. It is necessary
that we pay attention to these signals instead of viewing
them as burdens in our life. If we ignore or suppress health
symptoms, they will become progressively louder and more
extreme as the body attempts to capture our attention.
When the oil light comes on in our car, do we disconnect
the light, or do we take the car in for service? We usually
take our car to the shop at the first sign of trouble.
However, when it comes to our health, how many of us wait
until the situation becomes serious before taking action?
* metabolic: 신진대사의
①　Less Driving, Better Health
② Don’t Put Burdens on Your Mind
③　Listen to the Signals from Your Body
④　The Human Body: Art in Performance
⑤　The Body: The Mirror of the Personality
23. A woman in one of my seminars found that by going to
bed early she could get up at four o’clock in the morning.
She could then do the equivalent of a full day’s work by
seven or eight o’clock, before the average person even got
started. In no time at all, she was producing and earning
double the amount of her coworkers.
She was continually
promoted and paid more money because she was getting far
more done than anyone else. Successful people make a habit
of getting up early, usually by 6:00 or 6:30 in the morning,
sometimes earlier, and then getting going immediately. This
gives them a great jump on the day. The average person, on
the other hand, takes a full hour to get up and get going in
the morning. Then they drag themselves off to work,
thinking about lunchtime, and what they are going to do in
the evening.
① Put People Before Money!
② Rise Early, Be More Productive!
③ Good Health Comes from Sound Sleep
④ Failure: A Stepping Stone to Success
⑤ Slow Down and Enjoy Life
24. Derek Parra에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
In 1995, Derek Parra was the best inline skater in the
world, with eighteen world titles to his credit and a
projection of many more to come. He was the king of his
domain. However, there was a problem. Inline skating isn’t
included in the Olympics and Parra dreamed of winning an
Olympic gold medal. So, at the age of twentyfive,
he
switched to the sport of speedskating, a cousin of inline
skating but with two important differences: you race on
skates instead of wheels and on ice instead of asphalt.
There was nothing easy about the switch. Parra had grown
up in southern California and had hardly ever seen any ice,
let alone spent any time on it. Overnight, he went from
being No. 1 in the world to just somebody in the back of
the pack. However, he stuck to his goals and persisted in
making the transition, and in the 2002 Winter Olympic
Games in Salt Lake City, he won his Olympic gold medal.
① 1995년에 세계 최고의 인라인스케이트 선수였다.
② 올림픽에서 금메달 따기를 꿈꾸었다.
③ 남부 California에서 성장했다.
④ 종목을 바꾼 직후에 세계 정상의 선수가 되었다.
⑤ 2002년 동계 올림픽에서 금메달을 땄다.
영어 영역 4
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
4 8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
UK / US Students Wanting to Study Overseas
― Main Non-Academic Motives (2012)
The graph above shows the main nonacademic
motives
identified by UK and US students wanting to study overseas
in 2012. ①The number one motive for students from both
countries was to have a unique adventure. ②To travel
overseas was the second biggest motive for US students. ③
The percentage of UK students interested in starting an
international career was seventeen percentage points higher
than that of US students with the same motive. ④To improve
employment prospects was the second biggest motive for UK
students, but the least attractive to US students. ⑤The
percentage of US students who wanted to build selfconfidence
was exactly the same as that of UK students who wanted to
become selfsufficient.
26. Fire Safety Poster Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일
치하지 않는 것은?
Fire Safety Poster Contest
What do you know about fire safety? Create a
poster displaying a tip for fire prevention and
safety.
* Participants: The contest is open to all elementary
school students. Entries are for single applicants only.
Group artwork will not be accepted.
* Form: All entries must be original paintings.
Photographs are not accepted. A “short” fire safety
message must be written on the artwork.
* Deadline: March 28, 2015
The first winner will get an opportunity to ride to school
on a fire truck. All winning posters will be on display in
the City Hall.
① 개인 지원자만 작품을 제출할 수 있다.
② 작품에 사진을 포함해도 된다.
③ 작품 안에 화재 안전에 관해 짤막한 메시지를 써야 한다.
④ 1등 수상자는 소방차를 타고 학교에 갈 기회를 얻게 된다.
⑤ 수상작들은 시청에 전시될 예정이다.
27. 2015 Superhero Walkathon에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일
치하는 것은?
2015 Superhero Walkathon
The Superhero Walkathon is an annual
fundraising walking event held to support the
Active Way, a charity dedicated to granting
the wishes of terminally ill children. Come out dressed
up as your favorite superhero and be a real hero for
kids who need one.
* Date: Saturday, April 25, 2015
* Place: Green River Park
* Registration: You can register on the event date.
- $20 per person
- $10 for children aged 12 and under
* Time: Registration starts at 8:30 a.m.
Walk begins at 10:00 a.m.
Superhero capes are given to the first 200 registered
participants.
For additional information, please send an email to
patrick@activeway.org.
* cape: 망토
①　중증 노인 환자를 돕기 위한 기금 마련 행사이다.
②　행사 당일에는 등록을 받지 않는다.　
③　12세 이하 어린이는 무료로 참가할 수 있다.
④　등록은 오전 10시에 시작한다.
⑤　등록한 순서대로 200명에게 슈퍼히어로 망토를 준다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Coming home from work the other day, I saw a woman
trying to turn onto the main street and ①having very little
luck because of the constant stream of traffic. I slowed and
allowed her to turn in front of me. I was feeling pretty good
until, a couple of blocks later, she stopped to let a few more
cars into the line, causing us both to miss the next light. I
found myself completely ②irritated with her. How dare she
slow me down after I had so graciously let her into the
traffic! As I was sitting there stewing, I realized ③how
ridiculous I was being. Suddenly, a phrase I once read ④came
floating into my mind: ‘You must do him or her a kindness for
inner reasons, not because someone is keeping score or
because you will be punished if you don’t.’ I realized ⑤what I
had wanted a reward: If I do this nice thing for you, you (or
someone else) will do an equally nice thing for me.
* stew: 안달하다
영어 영역
5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
5 8
29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Igor Cerc went to a store to have a clock engraved. It
was a gift he was taking to a wedding the day he was
picking it up. However,　when he arrived at the store, ①he
found that the technician had broken the glass of the clock
during the engraving process. They offered to replace the
entire clock, after they got money from their insurance
company, but Igor needed the clock now. He realized that it
would not serve ② his goals to get upset. He calmly said
that he needed to　go to a wedding in thirty minutes; the
clock was ③ his wedding gift. He noted that there was
similar glass in other clocks in the store. Couldn’t the store
take apart another clock to fix his? He was calm and polite
throughout. “The clerk thanked me for not yelling at ④him
as other customers do,” said Igor. “I realized that he would
do everything he could for me as long as I remained polite.”
The clerk took apart another clock and quickly replaced the
glass, and Igor went on ⑤his way.
30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은? [3점]
It is often believed that an active person can make friends
more easily than a shy person, and that a conscientious
person may meet more deadlines than a person who is not
conscientious. Walter Mischel found, however, that the
typical correlation between personality traits and behavior
was quite (A) apparent / modest . This news was really
shocking, because it essentially said that the traits
personality psychologists were measuring were just slightly
better at predicting behavior than astrological signs. Mischel
did not simply point out the problem; he diagnosed the
reasons for it. He argued that personality psychologists had
(B) overestimated / underestimated the extent to which the
social situation shapes people’s behavior, independently of
their personality. To predict whether a person will meet a
deadline, for example, knowing something about the situation
may be more useful than knowing the person’s score on a
measure of conscientiousness. Situational influences can be
very powerful, sometimes (C) emphasizing / overwhelming
individual differences in personality.
* conscientious: 성실한 ** astrological sign: 점성술의 별자리
(A) (B) (C)
① apparent ··· overestimated ··· emphasizing
② apparent ··· underestimated ··· emphasizing
③ modest ··· overestimated ··· emphasizing
④ modest ··· overestimated ··· overwhelming
⑤ modest ··· underestimated ··· overwhelming
[31 ~ 33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. When the navigation app on your smartphone is telling you
the best route to the airport based on current traffic
patterns, how does it know where the traffic is? Navigation
systems are tracking your cell phone and the cell phones of
thousands of other users of the applications to see how
quickly those cell phones move through traffic. If you’re
stuck in a traffic jam, your cell phone reports the same GPS
coordinates for several minutes; if traffic is moving swiftly,
your cell phone moves as quickly as your car and these
apps can recommend routes based on that. The quality of
the overall system depends crucially on there being a large
number of users. In this respect they’re similar to
telephones, fax machines, and email:
If only one or two
people have them, they are not much good ―their utility
increases with _____________.
* coordinate: 좌표
① inventors’ ideas
② the number of users
③ the design of devices
④ the cost of production
⑤ geographical conditions
32. When scientists describe tool use by human beings, it is
usually in terms of mechanical tools. This may apply to
tools such as a sharpened flint blade or an electric drill. The
key point is that the tool is thought of as passive and with
a small number of predetermined uses. The digital revolution
has begun to change this landscape in a significant way.
Tools are now being developed with a general function in
mind, but they are not predetermined in their operations. As
a result, ___________________. For example, the personal
computer is designed for the general function of handling
and processing information, but exactly how the PC is used
is not predetermined. Therefore, for some, it may offer a
means of communication; for others, a sophisticated means
of managing accounts; and for yet others, an entertainment
platform. [3점]
* flint: 부싯돌
① you should find the merits of old inventions
② it is not possible to predict the outcome of their use
③ individual digital devices have grown smaller and cheaper
④ you should follow ethical rules when designing tools
⑤ they are not associated with mutual communication
영어 영역 6
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
6 8
33. The human brain cannot completely comprehend or
appreciate all that it encounters in its lifespan. Even if a
music lover kept his headphones on for every minute of
every day for an entire year, he wouldn’t be able to listen
to more than an eighth of all the albums that are released
just in the United States in one year. Because we do not
possess the capacity to give equal time to every artistic
product that might come our way, we must rely on
shortcuts. We may look for reviews and ratings of the latest
movies before we decide which ones we’d like to see. We
often let personal relationships guide our decisions about
what art we allow into our lives. Also, we continually rely
on the distribution systems through which we experience art
―museums, galleries, radio stations, television networks,
etc. ―to narrow the field of possibilities for us so that we
don’t have to ___________________________. [3점]
① spend all of our energy searching for the next great thing
② know how to turn our artistic talents into profits
③ create artistic products to learn about art
④ satisfy our deeply rooted hunger for art
⑤ avoid buying musical instruments online
34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
In an astonishing example of how nurturing can influence
nature, there is considerable evidence confirming that how
parents emotionally respond to their children can encourage
or suppress genetic tendencies. Biology is not destiny, so
gene expression is not necessarily inevitable. To produce
their effects, genes must be turned on. (A) , shyness
is a trait that seems to be partially hereditary. If parents
are overprotective of their shy young daughter, the toddler
is likely to remain shy. However, if they encourage her to
interact with other toddlers, she may overcome it.
(B) , genetic tendencies toward intelligence, sociability,
and aggression can be stimulated, controlled, or suppressed
by parental response and other environmental influences.
(A) (B)
① For example ··· Thus
② For example ··· However
③ Nevertheless ··· Thus
④ Nevertheless ··· Similarly
⑤ As a result ··· However
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Animals may have a limited understanding of what is
happening now, but only humans seem to enrich their
understanding of the present by thoughtful links to events in
the distant past and future. Indeed, human goals often link
what one does now to possible outcomes that lie years
away. ①Thus, human action is not just a hereandnow
response but is often designed to help bring about something
far off, such as graduation or marriage or retirement. ② It
can also be linked to things that have happened elsewhere
or long ago, such as when people celebrate Independence
Day or a religious holiday. ③ Moreover, people often follow
the rules made in distant places by people they will never
meet. ④Different societies make different rules, so it’s hard
to say which rules are more natural than others. ⑤ Most
Americans pay income tax, for example, though few have
any direct contact with the people who make the tax laws.
[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Sir Edward C. BurneJones
was a prominent
nineteenthcentury
English artist. One day he was invited
to dinner at the home of his daughter.
(A) The next morning, he arrived at his daughter’s home
with paints and palette. He went to the wall where the
little girl had been forced to stand, and there he painted
pictures ―a kitten chasing its tail, lambs in a field, and
goldfish swimming.
(B) As a special treat, his young granddaughter was allowed
to come to the table; she misbehaved, and her mother
made her stand in the corner with her face to the wall.
Sir Edward, a welltrained
grandfather, did not interfere
with his grandchild’s training.
(C) He decorated the wall on both sides of that corner with
paintings for his granddaughter’s delight. If she had to
stand in the corner again, at least she would have
something to look at.
① (A) －(C) －(B) ② (B) － (A) －(C)
③ (B) －(C) －(A) ④ (C) － (A) －(B)
⑤ (C) －(B) －(A)
영어 영역
7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
7 8
37.
Mass customization is a strategy that allows
manufacturers or retailers to provide individualized
products to consumers. Today’s apparel supplier must
look for new ways to offer customers topquality
goods
at highly competitive prices.
(A) The customer then receives the finished product in a
very short time. This technological strategy is used
today by some fashion firms. This type of customization
is often limited, however, to a small number of
customers.
(B) Based on the exact image, body scanning software then
defines and captures all the measurements necessary for
actually producing the garment or shoe. This data is
forwarded online to the manufacturer, whose production
technologies ensure an exact fit.
(C) Consumers desire products that can be personalized
through fit preferences, color selection, fabric choices,
or design characteristics. A solution to the fit
preference is a body or foot scanner that takes a
customer’s measurements digitally, creating what is
referred to as digital twin. [3점]
* apparel: 의류
① (A) －(C) －(B) ② (B) －(A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) －(A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가
장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
For example, if you say “I’m going to the bank to deposit
some money,” I don’t expect you to go to the river bank.
Often, a word is used with more than one meaning. Indeed,
a brief look at a dictionary will show you that the majority of
words are used with more than one meaning. ( ① ) If such
words were said to be ambiguous, then the vast majority of
words would be ambiguous. ( ② ) However, linguists and
philosophers usually call a word “ambiguous” only when there
is some uncertainty about which meaning is being used in the
particular instance. ( ③ ) A word isn’t ambiguous by itself but
is used ambiguously: it is ambiguous when one cannot tell from
the context what sense is being used. ( ④ ) However, in most
cases one can tell from the context what sense is being
used. ( ⑤ ) The word “bank” has these two senses (and more),
but it is not thereby ambiguous: the two senses are so
unrelated that no one is likely to confuse them.
39.
Reading has also always had a social dimension, however,
as it does in our early lives: our first acts of reading are
performed with parents and teachers standing by and
guiding us.
When we read, we are alone. Reading calls us to our sole
self, and away from the world of distractions; but it also
furnishes us with farreaching
connections to other people.
( ① ) The peaceful calm of a desert island is not a bad
image to have in your head as you prepare to read. ( ② )
No earthly storms can reach you here; you are safe. ( ③ )
The desert island image reinforces the idea that reading is a
fundamentally solitary experience. ( ④ ) These mentors left
their stamp on how we approach a text; they gave us the
tools we use to get closer to the words on the page. ( ⑤ )
There is, of course, another social connection in reading: we
always converse, by implication, with the book’s author.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
The main reason you’re drawn to novel or surprising
things is that it could upset the safe, predictable status
quo and even threaten your survival. If you’ve ever tried
to carry on a conversation in a room in which a TV is
playing, you know that it’s hard not to glance at the
screen occasionally. Even if you don’t want to watch,
your brain is attracted by that constantly shifting stream
of images, because change can have lifeordeath
consequences. Indeed, if our early African ancestors
hadn’t been good at fixing all their attention on the
justripened
fruit or the approaching predators, we
wouldn’t be here. For the same reason, a strong
sensitivity to the odd detail that doesn’t quite correspond
with the way things usually are or ought to be is a
major asset for a soldier in a war zone. Even in
everyday situations, you can’t afford to miss that
jaywalker darting in front of your car or the single new
and important fact in a long, boring list.
* status quo: 현재의 상황 ** jaywalker: 무단 횡단자
󰀻
We are sensitive to (A) because that sensitivity
gives advantages for our (B) .
(A) (B)
① change ··· safety
② change ··· creativity
③ criticism ··· intelligence
④ criticism ··· safety
⑤ beauty ··· creativity
영어 영역 8
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
8 8
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Blood pressure has to rise when we get out of bed in
the morning, so that there is enough blood flow to the
brain to keep us from fainting. When we sit down to
read the morning newspaper, it goes down again. There
is not a single, ideal level of blood pressure that our
body tries to maintain. At the same time, it is obviously
not to our benefit for blood pressure to get too low or
too high, and there are mechanisms in place to keep it
within a limited range.
I believe that a similar process occurs with human
emotions. It is to people’s advantage to react emotionally
to their environments, such that emotions vary from
moment to moment. It is also to people’s advantage to
have mechanisms in place to keep them away from the
emotional extremes.
Think, for example, about the last time you
experienced a state of happiness. Maybe it was the day
you were married, or the day your child was born. You
probably experienced a wave of pleasure rushing through
your body. Your heart was beating rapidly, your blood
pressure went up, and you were short of breath. Now
imagine what it would be like to feel this way for an
hour, a day, or a week. Sounds exhausting, doesn’t it?
positive (or negative) emotions might have
psychological costs, making it difficult to concentrate and
to notice new emotional information.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Pleasure Is Determined by What You Think
② A Sound Mind Rests in a Sound Body
③ Our Emotions Are Like Blood Pressure
④ Positive Emotions Can Lower Blood Pressure
⑤ Blood Pressure: The Indicator of Your Health
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Unexpected ② Varied ③ Prolonged
④ Intended ⑤ Copied
[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Justin wished that his dad had a different job. It
sounded so cool to say, “My dad is at the office!”
However, Justin’s dad sold plastic souvenirs to tourists
from a street stall. When other kids asked him, “What
does your dad do for a living?” he always said, “(a) He
is in business.” Then he would quickly change the
subject before anyone could ask details about the kind of
business in which his dad was involved.
(B)
His dad smiled. “Ever since your sixth birthday, I’ve
put Saturdays’ earnings into a savings account for you.
Now you can study at a college of your choice.” Justin
felt a lump in his throat. “Thanks, Dad! I’ll work hard,”
he promised. “I’ll get a degree and a good job and then
(b) you won’t have to stand on windy street corners to
sell your stuff any longer.” His dad gave him a warm
hug.
(C)
He was also upset that his dad had to work on
Saturdays. (c) He was never free to watch Justin play in
soccer matches. The other dads would stand on the
sidelines, cheering their sons, but his dad only said,
“Enjoy the game, Justin! I wish I could be there to see
you score the winning goal!” In the final match of the
final season, when he had been voted man of the match,
his dad wasn’t there to see it.
(D)
Justin dreamed of going to college one day, but (d) he
thought it was an impossible goal. Yet he prayed about it
regularly. On his seventeenth birthday, his dad handed
him a big envelope. ‘What could be inside?’ he wondered.
He hoped for money to buy new sneakers. But inside the
envelope was a file of documents. “What’s this?” he
asked. “Those are application forms for college,” his dad
answered. “You can look through them and tell (e) me
which course you want to take.” “But where will the
money come from?” Justin asked, surprised.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 Justin에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 아버지의 직업을 알리고 싶어 하지 않았다.
② 아버지께 대학 학위를 따겠다고 약속했다.
③ 토요일에도 아버지께서 일하러 가시는 것을 싫어했다.
④ 축구 시합에 늘 응원하러 나오시는 아버지께 감사했다.
⑤ 아버지에게서 대학 입학 지원서를 받았다.
※ 확인 사항 ◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.

1
8
2016학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, I’ll buy that raincoat.
② No. I’ll bring her an umbrella.
③ Wow. The weather is so clear.
④ Good. We should come home early.
⑤ I agree. Let’s go and eat out tonight.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good. I’ll take the class.
② Sure. I’ll bring my textbook.
③ Okay. You can leave a message.
④ You’re right. The meeting was successful.
⑤ That’s true. But I thought it was tomorrow.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 동물 꼬리의 다양한 기능
② 희귀 동물 보호의 필요성
③ 동물들의 다양한 의사소통 방법
④ 곤충류 날개와 조류 날개의 차이점
⑤ 날개의 기능과 꼬리 기능의 유사성
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 독서는 학업 성적을 향상시킨다.
② 글쓰기는 정서 발달을 촉진한다.
③ 토론 수업은 말하기 능력을 신장시킨다.
④ 올바른 독서 습관은 유년기에 형성된다.
⑤ 문학 작품 읽기는 상상력 향상에 도움이 된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 가수 － 매니저 ② 작가 － 출판사 직원
③ 영화감독 － 기자 ④ 관광객 － 관광 가이드
⑤ 출연자 － 연출가
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to contact a band
② to reserve a restaurant
③ to pick up a wedding dress
④ to send out invitations
⑤ to make a cake
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 변경된 날에 역사 유적지 탐방을 갈 수
없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 가족 여행을 가야 해서
② 지리 숙제를 해야 해서
③ 뮤지컬 예행연습이 있어서
④ 할머니 생신 잔치에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 수해 복구 봉사 활동에 참여해야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $63 ② $72 ③ $90 ④ $99 ⑤ $110
10. 대화를 듣고, Blood Donor Day에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지
않은 것을 고르시오.
① 날짜 ② 슬로건 ③ 장소
④ 참여 자격 ⑤ 증정품
11. Art Museum Fair에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오.
① 1995년에 시작되었다.
② 지역 예술가를 후원하는 행사이다.
③ 매년 가을에 개최된다.
④ 입장료는 20달러이다.
⑤ 민속춤 공연을 포함한다.
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 냉장고를
고르시오.
Refrigerators on Sale
Model Price Storage
(liters) Type Warranty
(years)
① A $1,100 850 Four-door 3
② B $900 750 Four-door 2
③ C $800 650 Four-door 3
④ D $700 650 Two-door 3
⑤ E $500 450 Two-door 2
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Yes. It’s very time-consuming, but it’s worth it.
② I’m sorry that I didn’t clean up my room yet.
③ That’s why I parked my car in the garage.
④ Yeah. A garage sale can save your time.
⑤ I didn’t get my newspaper today, either.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① You sing the songs beautifully.
② I’ll give you my phone number.
③ Just thinking of it makes me happy.
④ I’m sorry to hear that you’re leaving.
⑤ Let’s go and get our tickets refunded.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Matilda가 Tony에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Matilda: Tony,
① swimming is a popular sport.
② your temperature isn’t that high.
③ teamwork will win the competition.
④ you should get ready for practice now.
⑤ the most important thing is your health.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 홍보 자료 제작 협조를 요청하려고
② 전공 체험 프로그램을 안내하려고
③ 대학 내 편의 시설을 소개하려고
④ 수강 신청 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 입학 지원 자격을 알려주려고
17. 언급된 학과가 아닌 것은?
① Economics ② Biology ③ Sociology
④ Chemistry ⑤ Architecture
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Mr. Johnson,
I would like to thank you for approving my request that
the company pay for my college tuition. Today, Human
Resources informed me that you had signed my request for
payment. I want to tell you that this financial relief will
make a great difference in my life. Now, I can focus more
on my job. This will enable me to perform better at my
work and contribute more to the company. Once again, I
appreciate your support of my tuition and your faith in me.
Sincerely,
Warwick Smith
* Human Resources: 인사 부서
① 학비 지원 승인에 감사하려고
② 대학 입학 추천서를 부탁하려고
③ 장학금 신청 자격을 문의하려고
④ 급여 인상 계획 승인을 요청하려고
⑤ 업무 효율성 향상 방안을 제안하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Gabby의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Stepping up to the microphone, Gabby could feel the sweat
starting to run down her face and neck. She tried to take a deep
breath, but couldn’t. As her name was called, Gabby became
more afraid of speaking before a large audience. Then, she
suddenly remembered the words of a woman who had gradually
overcome the same fear: “Fear, rapid heartbeat, quick breathing,
and sweating are simply the body’s declaration that we are ready
to fight.” Recalling this, Gabby calmed down and remembered
clearly what she had to say. Assured, Gabby smiled and started
to deliver her speech. The words flowed out like water, and
her beating heart gave her more and more mental strength.
The performance was successful. She had overcome her fear.
① hopeful → scared ② indifferent → refreshed
③ jealous → delighted ④ anxious → confused
⑤ worried → confident
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Planning involves only the half of your brain that controls
your logical thinking. The other intuitive half of your brain
is left out of this planning process. If you insist on always
having a plan, you cut yourself off from your intuitive self
and the inner joy it provides. To break planning addiction,
allow yourself one freedom. Decide to spend a day exploring
a park or a neighborhood with curiosity as your only guide.
The next time you feel attracted to someone, and want to
introduce yourself, go ahead. You’ll be likely to make a new
friend. By giving yourself freedom to follow your intuition,
you develop your sensitivity to your inner voice. You learn to
hear the quiet messages that can make your life an adventure.
① 내면의 즐거움을 얻기 위해 친구를 많이 사귀어라.
② 학습 계획을 수립할 때는 시간 배분을 적절히 해라.
③ 사고력 향상을 위해 가능한 한 산책 시간을 늘려라.
④ 새로운 모험을 시작하기 전에 주변 사람들과 상의해라.
⑤ 계획 수립에 얽매이지만 말고 때로는 직관에 따라 행동해라.
이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
[21～22] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
21. Although the Internet seems truly global these days,
less than half of the world’s population has access to
it. Some four billion people are still unconnected. This
spring, IT engineers will begin to shift to the next phase
in a grand plan to bring the Internet to everyone. Their
goal is to establish a network of high-altitude balloons
that will rain 4G LTE signals down to anyone with a
4G device. Regional telecom companies will transmit the
signals to the balloons, and then each balloon will relay
the signals to a ground area many miles in diameter. In
this way, farmers in remote areas will be able to access
weather data, and rural children will be able to pursue
online educations. By the end of the year, the engineers
aim to have 100 balloons about 13 miles up.
* altitude: 높이, 고도
① Balloons for Weather Forecasting
② Balloons to Connect the World
③ A One-Day Tour in a Balloon
④ Online Education for Farmers
⑤ 4G: The Fastest Connection
22. Inflation can be a major life concern for most people.
It makes it difficult for households to plan ahead. This is
because ‘future problems’ concerning inflation often make
us change our plans for the future. For instance, how
much should the parents of a newborn start regularly
saving to pay for her college education? If inflation
averages two percent, prices roughly double every thirty-six
years. But if inflation gets up to eight percent, prices
roughly double every nine years. A Harvard education
that currently costs $100,000 may therefore end up costing
half a million dollars for an infant born today. Millions
of workers who retired with pensions during the 1960s
and 1970s found that inflation pushed up costs far beyond
their expected expenses. Many had to reenter the workforce
just to make ends meet.
① What Causes Inflation?
② Inflation Affects Future Plans
③ Various Ways to Reduce the Inflation Rate
④ Actual Benefits Exceed Estimated Expenses
⑤ How Quickly Can the Inflation Rate Climb?
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Tourism is important for more than just vacationing.
Tourism allows people from different places and cultures
to come together, and then tourists and host communities
learn about each other’s differences and similarities. They
also learn new tastes and ways of thinking, which may
lead to a better understanding between hosts and tourists.
Another positive effect of tourism is the aid it provides
for the survival of a society’s culture, especially the
culture’s art forms. The opportunity to sell native artworks
to tourists or perform folk dances for them may encourage
local artists to preserve traditional art forms. For example,
Fijians have developed their palm mat and shell jewelry
crafts into profitable tourist businesses. They also earn
additional income by performing folk dances and fire
walking.
① misunderstandings between hosts and tourists
② various ways of creating tourism products
③ negative effects of cultural exchanges
④ disappearance of traditional cultures
⑤ cultural benefits of tourism
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Distribution of Time Spent per Shopping App Category
The above graph shows the distribution of time spent by
consumers using shopping apps across various shopping
app categories in December 2011 and December 2012. ① Of
the six categories, Retailer apps saw the greatest increase in
the share of time spent, from 15% in December 2011 to
27% in December 2012. ② On the other hand, the share of
time spent with Online Marketplace apps decreased from
25% in December 2011 to 20% in December 2012. ③ The
Purchase Assistant app share decreased by one percentage
point from December 2011 to December 2012. ④ The share
of Price Comparison apps in December 2011 was the same
as that in December 2012. ⑤ Daily Deal apps showed the
smallest share of time spent in both December 2011 and
December 2012.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. 교황 Julius Ⅱ의 무덤에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
The project of creating the tomb of Pope Julius Ⅱ was
originally given to Michelangelo in 1505, but the tomb
was not completed until 1545. It was designed by
Michelangelo himself as the pope requested. The design
called for some 40 statues, and the tomb was to be a
giant structure. Just less than a year after the initial work
on the tomb began, it stopped because of lack of funds.
When Pope Julius Ⅱ died in 1513, he left money for the
completion of his tomb, so Michelangelo started work
again. After some years of carving, he completed Moses,
one of the most famous statues of the tomb. However,
the next pope, Leo X, had little interest in continuing the
project. As time went on, its scale was reduced, and the
project for the tomb was revised again and again.
① Michelangelo가 디자인했다.
② 자금 부족으로 작업이 중단된 적이 있다.
③ Moses는 무덤의 가장 유명한 조각상 중 하나이다.
④ 교황 Leo X는 프로젝트를 지속하는 것에 관심이 많았다.
⑤ 프로젝트는 여러 차례 수정되었다.
26. 2015 National Essay Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
① 주제가 정해져 있지 않다.
② 대학생을 대상으로 한다.
③ 1인당 1편의 에세이만 제출할 수 있다.
④ 수상자는 2015년 7월 15일에 발표된다.
⑤ 에세이는 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.
27. Eugene Farm Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
① 오전 10시부터 오후 4시까지 진행된다.
② 오후에 치즈 만드는 법을 배울 수 있다.
③ 입장료에는 점심 값이 포함되어 있다.
④ 2세 이하는 무료로 입장할 수 있다.
⑤ 예약을 하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
An independent artist is probably the one ① who lives
closest to an unbounded creative situation. Many artists
have considerable freedom from external requirements
about what to do, how to do it, when to do it, and why.
At the same time, however, we know that artists usually
limit themselves quite ② forcefully by choice of material
and form of expression. To make the choice to express a
feeling by carving a specific form from a rock, without
the use of high technology or colors, ③ restricting the
artist significantly. Such choices are not made to limit
creativity, but rather to cultivate ④ it. When everything is
possible, creativity has no tension. Creativity is strange in
that it finds its way in any kind of situation, no matter
how restricted, just as the same amount of water flows
faster and stronger through a narrow strait ⑤ than across
the open sea.
* strait: 해협
Eugene Farm Tour
Are you looking for somewhere special to go for the
weekend? Come and visit Eugene Farm, and enjoy our
beautiful fields, barns, and cheese shop.
Tour Schedule
∙The tour will run from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Sunday, June 14, 2015.
- Morning: See a wide variety of crops and animals.
- Lunch (12:30 p.m. ― 1:30 p.m.): Everything we serve
is grown on our farm!
- Afternoon: Visit our cheese shop, and you can learn
how to make cheese!
Admission Fee (lunch included)
∙$30 for 11 & older
∙$20 for children aged 3 to 10
∙Free for 2 & under
Reservation
∙Reservations are required, and must be made on
our website (www.eugenefarm.com) by 6:00 p.m.,
Thursday, June 11, 2015.
2015 National Essay Contest
The Evergreen Foundation is excited to call for
submissions for the 2015 National Essay Contest! This
contest is designed to encourage high school students to
become more aware of the importance of our environment.
Contest Theme
∙How can we preserve our forests?
Requirements & Submission Guidelines
∙High school students only
∙Only one essay per student
∙Essays must be between 1,500 and 2,000 words.
∙Due by July 15, 2015
We will announce the winners of this year’s contest
on August 15, 2015.
Only essays submitted by email will be accepted.
(email: 2015essay@evergreeners.org)
For more information, visit www.evergreeners.org.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
The desert locust lives in two remarkably different
styles depending on the availability of food sources and
the density of the local locust population. When food is
scarce, as it usually is in their native desert habitat,
locusts are born with coloring designed for camouflage
and lead (A) solitary / social lives. But when rare periods
of significant rain produce major vegetation growth,
everything changes. At first, the locusts continue to be
loners, just feasting off the (B) insufficient / abundant
food supply. But as the extra vegetation starts to die
off, the locusts find themselves crowded together.
Suddenly, baby locusts are born with bright colors and a
preference for company. Instead of avoiding one another
and hiding from predators through camouflage and
inactivity, these locusts gather in vast groups, feed
together, and (C) overwhelm / overestimate their predators
simply through numbers.
* camouflage: 위장
(A) (B) (C)
① solitary …… insufficient …… overwhelm
② solitary …… abundant …… overwhelm
③ solitary …… insufficient …… overestimate
④ social …… abundant …… overwhelm
⑤ social …… insufficient …… overestimate
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Ellie walked to school in her new shoes. “I like those,”
Megan whispered. “Cool.” Ellie felt happy. ① She knew
it was hard to get compliments from Megan and couldn’t
hide her smile. The two friends had desks side by side at
the back. “Stop talking, you two,” said Miss Smith.
“Bring your books to me if you’ve finished.” Ellie
followed Megan to the front of the class. ② She always
let Megan go first. She felt scared when Miss Smith
was upset. Miss Smith noticed ③ her new shoes. “Those
aren’t suitable for school,” she said, her voice cold. Ellie
took a deep breath. “The shop didn’t have black shoes,
Miss Smith,” ④ she said. Her voice came out in a
whisper. “The school uniform requires black or dark blue
shoes,” said Miss Smith. “Report to me in proper shoes,
please. On Monday.” ⑤ She used her quiet-shout voice
and Ellie shivered.
* shiver: 떨다
[31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. In an increasingly globalized world, literature in
translation has an especially important role. Increasingly,
writers, readers, and publishers are turning to literature as
a bridge between cultures, particularly Western and Arab
societies. This growing interest is, in turn, driving a
boom in translation. However, not surprisingly perhaps,
most translations are from English into other languages,
not from another language, such as Arabic, into English.
Hence, the huge American market is seen as driving the
. Bookstores in the United States, for example,
rarely stock more than Nobel Prize winner Naguib
Mahfouz’s Cairo Trilogy, a masterful, realistic account of
life in Cairo and of a merchant family in the mid-20th
century. Western readers likely know little of Mahfouz’s
more experimental work, his political and religious
allegories, or his historical dramas. The result is a kind
of one-way mirror between America and the rest of the
world. [3점]
* allegory: 우화, 풍자
① equality ② diversity ③ interaction
④ imbalance ⑤ uncertainty
32. We tend to assume that the way to get more time is
to speed up. But speeding up can actually slow us down.
Anyone who has ever rushed out of the house only to
realize that their keys and wallet are sitting on the
kitchen table knows this only too well. And it’s not just our
efficiency that is reduced. The quality of the experience
suffers too, as we become less aware or ‘mindful.’ Have
you ever eaten an entire meal without tasting any of it?
Hurrying up doesn’t just give us less time, it can also
steal the pleasure and benefit from the time that we do
have. For many of us, hurrying is a way of life. Some
of us enjoy the thrill that it gives us while others are
driven crazy by the constant pressure and feel that their
lives are speeding up to an unacceptable degree. Either
way, there are almost certainly areas of our life that
could be . [3점]
① affected by temporary sufferings
② disturbed by inconsistent behaviors
③ enhanced by a little go-slow behavior
④ complicated by slow-but-steady actions
⑤ dominated by a little speedy decision making
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. The audience receives a sound signal entirely through
the vibrations generated in the air, whereas in a singer
some of the auditory stimulus is conducted to the ear
through the singer’s own bones. Since these two ways of
transferring sound have quite different relative efficiencies
at various frequencies, the overall quality of the sound
will be quite different. You have probably experienced this
when you have listened to your own voice, as on tape or
through a public address system. It is easy to blame the
‘sound of a stranger’ on ‘poor electronics,’ but this is
only partly justified. The major effect comes from the fact
that you hear yourself differently from the way others hear
you. This is one of the main reasons why even the most
accomplished singers have to listen to the opinion of
coaches and voice teachers as to ‘how they sound,’ whereas
no concert violinist would have to do such a thing. To the
violinist
to someone else standing nearby. [3점]
* frequency: 주파수
① the coaches are more helpful than they are
② sounds spread a lot more widely than they do
③ the audience response is just as important as it is
④ playing sounds almost exactly the same as it does
⑤ the ‘sound of a stranger’ matters more than it does
34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Problems can be distinguished according to whether
they are reasonable or unreasonable. Reasonable problems
are of the kind that can be solved in a step-by-step
manner. A crossword puzzle is of this nature. Given a
sufficient vocabulary, the empty spaces can be filled in
one by one. Unreasonable problems, (A) , cannot be
treated this way because the task contains some ‘trick’ or
‘catch’ that must be understood before someone can
arrive at a solution. This feature frustrates any step-by-step
process that proceeds without the realization that “things
aren’t what they seem.” (B) , successful problem
solving in these cases requires that the person acquire an
insight into the nature of the trick. Riddles provide
commonplace instances of such insight problems, such as
the classic riddle that the Sphinx posed to Oedipus.
(A) (B)
① in contrast …… Hence
② in contrast …… Nevertheless
③ for example …… Hence
④ for example …… Besides
⑤ in addition …… Nevertheless
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
School physical education programs should offer a
balanced variety of activities that allow young people to
develop ability in lifetime activities that are personally
meaningful and enjoyable. A balance should exist in
any physical education program among team, dual,
and individual (lifetime) sports. ① Team sports such as
basketball and soccer provide an opportunity for students
to develop skills and to enjoy working and competing
together as a team. ② However, in many school physical
education programs, team sports dominate the curriculum
at the expense of various individual and dual sports, like
tennis, swimming, badminton, and golf. ③ In such cases,
the students lose the opportunity to develop skills in
activities that they can participate in throughout their
adult lives. ④ Baseball, in particular, is one of the most
popular sports frequently broadcast on TV. ⑤ Only through
a balanced program of team, dual, and individual sports
is it possible to develop well-rounded individuals.
* dual: 둘의
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Cultural characteristics are not only passed from
parents to children, but may be passed on from any one
individual to another by word of mouth or by writing.
(A) Like those infectious diseases, cultural habits such as
pop music preferences and clothing fashions may
spread very quickly nowadays, especially through the
media of radio and television.
(B) So some cultural changes may be adopted quite
quickly by a whole population. Transmission of
culture is rather like transmission of an infection. Flu
and colds spread very quickly, especially with the
large amount of contact that people now have with
each other.
(C) However, other deep-rooted cultural characteristics of
races and racial subgroups are much more difficult to
change. These are the cultural patterns that are so
resistant to alteration that they have the appearance
of being inherent.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
The timing of positive versus negative behavior seems
to influence attraction. Several studies have identified
what has been called the loss-gain effect.
(A) Studies suggest that you would not. In fact, people
are more attracted to individuals who are consistently
negative than to people who initially behave positively
and then switch to negative behavior.
(B) The reason is this: people who start out being nice
get our hopes up, so the letdown we experience
when we discover that they are not nice makes it
worse than if they had acted badly from the start.
(C) This effect reflects what happens to attraction when a
person’s behavior moves from positive to negative or
from negative to positive. For example, if someone
seemed very nice to you early in the interaction, but
then began to act like a fool, would you be more
attracted to that person than if that person were a
fool from the start?
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
The spoonful of 95℃ soup hitting your foot hurts, but
not as badly as it would if you accidentally spilled the
entire pot of 95℃ soup on your foot.
Heat and temperature are two quantities that can be
easily confused. Imagine cooking a very large pot of
chicken soup on the stove. Let’s suppose you heat the
soup until it is 95℃, quite hot. ( ① ) You grab a spoon
and take out a spoonful of soup to taste. ( ② ) As you
remove the spoonful of soup from the pot, it has the
same temperature as the larger sample. ( ③ ) Unfortunately,
as you bring the soup towards your mouth to taste it, the
spoon slips from your hand, pouring its contents on your
bare foot. ( ④ ) If both the spoonful and the pot full of
soup have the same temperature, why would the larger
sample cause more damage if it came in contact with
your skin? ( ⑤ ) The answer to the question lies in the
difference between temperature and heat.
39.
They quickly pick out a whole series of items of the
same type, making a handful of, say, small screws.
People make extensive use of searching images. One
unexpected context is sorting. Suppose you have a bag of
small hardware ― screws, nails, and so on ― and you
decide to organize them into little jars. You dump the
stuff out on a table and begin separating the items into
coherent groups. ( ① ) It is possible to do this by
randomly picking up individual objects, one by one,
identifying each one, and then moving it to the
appropriate jar. ( ② ) But what most people do is very
different. ( ③ ) They put them in the jar and then go
back and do the same for a different kind of item. ( ④ )
So the sorting sequence is nonrandom, producing runs of
items of a single type. ( ⑤ ) It is a faster, more
efficient technique, and much of the increased efficiency
is due to the use of searching images. [3점]
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
There are two types of managers in business
organizations: functional managers and project managers.
Both types of managers have different roles and
qualities. Functional managers head one of a firm’s
departments such as marketing or engineering, and they
are specialists in the area they manage. They are skilled
at breaking the components of a system into smaller
elements, knowing something of the details of each
operation for which they are responsible. On the other
hand, project managers begin their career as specialists
in some field. When promoted to the position of project
manager, they must transform from technical caterpillar
to generalist butterfly. They oversee many functional
areas, each with its own specialists. Therefore, what is
required is an ability to put many pieces of a task
together to form a coherent whole. Thus, to understand
a frog, for example, functional managers cut it open to
examine it, but project managers watch it swim with
other frogs and consider the environment.
* caterpillar: 애벌레
󰀻
In business organizations, compared with the functional
managers who generally (A) what forms a system,
project managers focus on (B) all of its elements.
(A) (B)
① analyze …… splitting
② analyze …… combining
③ modify …… distributing
④ assemble …… dividing
⑤ assemble …… blending
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
It isn’t going to be easy making changes to the food
your children eat, and even the most careful, patient
parents will probably find that the little ones will resist
at some point and to some degree. The problem is that
many of us were forced to eat in a healthy way as
children: we learned the hard way. And the temptation
to continue with these parental habits with our own
children is strong.
If you were made to sit at the table until you had
cleaned your plate, you are not alone: most of the adult
population have suffered this at some point ― at school
if not at home. Forcing your children to eat, especially
if they don’t like what is on the plate, is completely
. “Sit there until you finish” may be
how we learned, and may also be the only way you feel
able to achieve your goal, but think about it: the
experience of eating a pile of unwanted cabbage until
they feel sick is hardly going to make children jump for
joy the next time it is served.
This strict approach is very old-fashioned, and you
may win the battle but you definitely won’t win the
war. Delaying puddings used to be thought of as a good
idea too, but guess what? That doesn’t work either. “No
pudding until you have finished your main course” was
the standard line when most parents of today were
young and is still commonly used, but it only makes
sweet things seem more desirable.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Do Old Feeding Habits Work?
② No More Instant Foods for Kids
③ Kids Today Need Table Manners
④ Time to Switch to Organic Food!
⑤ Homemade Pudding Makes Us Perfect
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① counterproductive ② beneficial ③ invaluable
④ unconventional ⑤ constructive
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
In 1887, when the land was up for sale, grandpa
bought two hundred acres from the Granger family. In
1918, (a) he bought another two hundred. It was good
rich land. However, there were bank loans for and taxes on
the land. Unfortunately, there had not been enough money
from the cotton to pay both of them and live on. To
make things worse, the price of cotton dropped in 1930.
(B)
Some of it belonged to Stacey, Christopher, and John,
not to mention the part that belonged to big mama and
mama. However, papa never divided the land in his mind;
it was simply the land of our family. For it, (b) he would
work the long, hot summer pounding steel; mama would
teach and run the farm; and big mama, in her sixties,
would work like a woman in her twenties in the cotton
fields and keep the house; but always, the taxes would be
paid. Papa said that one day I would understand.
(C)
When he came back from Louisiana, I asked papa
why he had to go away and why the land was so
important. (c) He took my hand and said in his quiet
way: “Look out there, Cassie. All that belongs to you.
You will never have to live on other people’s land. As
long as the family survives, you will have your own
place. That’s important. You may not understand now,
but one day you will.” I looked at papa strangely, for I
knew that all the land did not belong to me.
(D)
That was why papa had gone to work, ending up in
Louisiana in 1931. (d) He set out looking for work, first
going far north and south, and finally west into Louisiana.
It was there he found work laying track for the railroad.
He worked the remainder of the year away from us, not
returning until the deep winter. The following spring after
the planting was finished, (e) he did the same. Now it
was 1933, and papa was again in Louisiana laying track.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① ‘grandpa’는 1887년에 200에이커의 땅을 샀다.
② 1930년에 면화 가격이 하락했다.
③ ‘big mama’는 60대에 목화밭 일을 하지 않았다.
④ ‘I’는 ‘papa’에게 왜 그 땅이 중요한지 물었다.
⑤ ‘papa’는 Louisiana에서 철로를 놓는 일을 한 적이 있다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① They’ll be done in an hour.
② They were ready yesterday.
③ Let’s see if they’re my pants.
④ I tried, but I couldn’t fix them.
⑤ They’ll go shopping tomorrow.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m glad you love my new menu.
② Too many cooks won’t be helpful.
③ I’ll order more tomatoes for the dinner.
④ That’s too bad. The tomatoes aren’t fresh.
⑤ I’m sorry. I’ll call and change the order now.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 달리기 대회를 홍보하려고
② 수질 오염 문제를 알리려고
③ 달리기의 장점을 설명하려고
④ 강변 공원 개장을 안내하려고
⑤ 자선 행사 도우미를 모집하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 놀이는 아동의 학습 동기를 높인다.
② 뮤지컬 관람은 예술적 감수성을 높인다.
③ 취미 생활은 스트레스 해소에 유익하다.
④ 뮤지컬 수업은 아동의 자신감을 키워 준다.
⑤ 수업 시 아동의 흥미를 고려할 필요가 있다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 축구 코치－선수 ② 작곡가－지휘자
③ 영화 감독－소설가 ④ 사진 작가－영화 배우
⑤ 상담 교사－학생
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 여행 책자 보내기 ② 항공권 예약하기
③ 여행 일자 확인하기 ④ 호텔 정보 검색하기
⑤ 관광 가이드 구하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지하철을 이용하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 자동차 연료비가 올라서 ② 교통 체증을 피하려고
③ 자동차가 고장 나서 ④ 환경을 보호하려고
⑤ 운동량을 늘리려고
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $36 ② $45 ③ $50 ④ $63 ⑤ $70
10. 대화를 듣고, 현장 학습에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 활동 종류 ② 예약 인원 ③ 날짜
④ 결제 수단 ⑤ 준비 물품
11. Bamboo Pond Restaurant에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치
하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 중국의 Beijing에 위치하고 있다.
② 건축하는 데 2년 이상이 걸렸다.
③ 공연장에서 전통 쇼가 매일 열린다.
④ 아이들이 놀 수 있는 공간이 있다.
⑤ 200명의 요리사를 고용하고 있다.
제3교시
1
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 수업을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Sure. Let’s encourage more students to sign up.
② Perfect! Please tell me how I can contact him.
③ Perhaps we should just cancel the contest.
④ Unfortunately, I cannot change the topic.
⑤ Terrific! You’ll be the best judge ever.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Good for you. You’re going to major in robotics.
② I’m sorry. I can’t participate in volunteer activities.
③ That’s too bad. You really wanted to attend the lecture.
④ In fact, I already taught what he talked about yesterday.
⑤ That’s okay. I was happy to help out at the nursing home.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jessica가 Brian에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jessica:
① You can help me run my own blog.
② You’re the most competent manager.
③ Your blog is helpful to fix the problem.
④ You shouldn’t blame your team members.
⑤ You should focus on your work in the office.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 교육 매체의 보급 현황
② 광고 매체의 유형별 특징
③ 멀티미디어 사용의 부작용
④ 광고에 나타난 문화적 고정관념
⑤ 대중 매체에 대한 연령별 선호도
17. 언급된 매체가 아닌 것은?
① newspapers ② television ③ magazines
④ posters ⑤ Internet
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
* coral reef: 산호초
① 산호초 특별 전시회를 홍보하려고
② 환경 보호 지원 정책을 공모하려고
③ 산호초 보호를 위한 기부를 부탁하려고
④ 해양 생태계 보호 법률 제정을 촉구하려고
⑤ 산호초 다양성에 관한 연구 결과를 설명하려고
19. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
On my first day in the Emergency Center, I was about to
drink my coffee when the first call came. I quickly picked up
the line, “9-1-1.” My voice was trembling and my heart was
racing. A woman cried, “My husband’s not breathing!” I
instructed her to begin CPR. I was trying to be as steady as I
could, but I was shaking. The situation was absolutely critical.
While she was performing CPR, I immediately notified the
nearby hospital. After a few tense moments, she came back on
the line and shouted, “Where’s the ambulance?” I replied,
“It’s getting there as quickly as it can.”
① festive ② urgent ③ romantic
④ mysterious ⑤ monotonous
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Merely having goals clearly defined is not sufficient, for
one must also know, moment by moment, what precisely
needs to be done. For instance, a salesperson’s aim is to
conclude a sale profitably. However, each sale requires a
different approach: Should he be pushy or laid back,
authoritative or friendly? And what aspect of the product
should he emphasize? The answers to these questions depend
on variables that cannot be predicted in advance. This holds
true not only for sales but also for most human activities. One
must select a particular strategy appropriate to the occasion
and follow the chosen course of action. Doing so will ensure
more lasting success in reaching one’s goals.
① 비판적 분석에 기반을 두고 목표 설정을 해야 한다.
② 목표 달성을 위해 상황에 맞는 전략을 사용해야 한다.
③ 경제 활성화 전략 수립을 위해 시장 조사를 해야 한다.
④ 성공적인 업무 수행을 위해 작업 환경을 개선해야 한다.
⑤ 고객의 신뢰를 얻기 위해 일관된 전략을 사용해야 한다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Dear Supporter:
I am writing to ask you to financially support the Marine
Biodiversity Preservation Campaign. Global marine
biodiversity is increasingly endangered, and coral reefs
are among the most threatened marine environments on
Earth. This is particularly true for the reefs in the Coral
Triangle Region. With your donation, we can preserve
fragile coral reefs around the world. For more information
on how to donate, please visit www.marinebio.org/reefs.
Thank you.
Sincerely,
Braulio Ferreira
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
There is strong research evidence that children perform
better in mathematics if music is incorporated in it. It has been
shown that mathematics is related with music in various
known ways so much that not putting the relationship to good
use in and out of school could only be to our disadvantage.
Researchers at a Los Angeles school found that 136 second
year elementary school pupils who learned to play the piano
and read music improved their numeracy skills. This could be
so since learning music emphasizes thinking in space and
time, and when pupils learn rhythm, they are learning ratios,
fractions and proportions. Other researchers investigated the
ways in which first and third grade teachers could integrate
music into their regular math classrooms. They concluded that
music-math integrated lessons had positive effects on three
mathematical ability areas of modeling, problem solving and
application.
* fraction: 분수
① 음악과 수학은 조기 교육이 필요하다.
② 음악보다 수학 교육의 중요성이 강조되고 있다.
③ 음악이 수학적 능력을 향상시키는 데 도움이 된다.
④ 수학은 문제 해결 능력에 기본이 되는 학문이다.
⑤ 수학적 원리를 음악 교육 현장에 반영하는 것이 좋다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Do you have the emotional state of mind to become a leader?
People pay close attention to a leader’s subtle expressions of
emotion through body language and facial expression. Some
emotions such as enthusiasm can quickly become contagious.
Others, such as depression or discouragement, can drag down
the entire organization. Leaders with positive emotional states
of mind are like human magnets. People naturally gravitate to
them and want to follow them. Such leaders inspire enthusiasm
in their organizations and attract the best people to work for
them. Conversely, leaders who emit negative emotional states
of mind, who are irritable and bossy, repel people and have few
followers.
* contagious: 전염성의, 전파하는
** repel: 쫓아버리다
① reasons for leaders to hide their emotions
② influence of leaders’ emotional states on people
③ necessity for analyzing leaders’ states of mind
④ various ways of staying away from bad leaders
⑤ ways of strengthening emotional bonds among leaders
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Effective coaches prioritize. They focus on a single task
instead of trying to multitask. They understand that
multitasking is another way of saying you are going to
complete several tasks, none of which are going to be very
good. Yuhong Jiang, professor of psychology at Harvard
University, points out that the brain isn’t built to concentrate
on two things at once. It works more slowly if it tries to.
Effective coaches focus on those things that need to get done
and separate out everything else. Separating what’s important
from what’s not important is prioritizing. Ineffective coaches
fail to put the big tasks first. They either believe they have
unlimited time, thinking that they will have more time
tomorrow to get something done, or they underestimate how
much time they really do have. They have no ability to
estimate how long a task will take.
① How Effective Coaches Approach Tasks
② Why Psychologists Support Multitasking
③ New Horizons of Research on Brain Science
④ Prioritizing Leads to Inefficiency in Performance
⑤ Everything Has Side Effects, But Not Multitasking!
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Fruit and Vegetable Consumption
5 or More Times per Day, Canada, 2008
The above graph shows the percentages of fruit and
vegetable consumption 5 or more times per day by age group
and gender in Canada in 2008. ① Most notably, in each age
group, the percentage of female consumption of fruit and
vegetables 5 or more times per day was higher than that of
males. ② Across all age groups, less than 50 percent of males
consumed fruit and vegetables 5 or more times per day.
③ Among female groups, the 25 to 34 age group showed the
highest percentage; among male groups, the 12 to 17 age group
did so. ④ The percentage gap between males and females in
fruit and vegetable consumption 5 or more times per day was
smallest in the 12 to 17 age group, and largest in the 18 to 24
age group. ⑤ The percentage of female consumption of fruit
and vegetables 5 or more times per day in the 18 to 24 age
group was higher than that of the 35 to 44 age group by 0.1
percentage point.
4
4
8
25. Richard Porson에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
Richard Porson, one of Britain’s most notable classical
scholars, was born on Christmas in 1759. His talents were
recognized early, and he was sent to Eton College by wealthy
sponsors at 15. Four years later, he entered Cambridge
University. He significantly improved Greek texts and edited
four plays written by Euripides. In 1806, he was elected
Principal Librarian at the newly founded London Institution.
During his lifetime, he collected a great many books on
classical literature. Although the number of books he owned
in total is simply unknown, an episode about his passion for
books is well-known: he carried so many books that he was
able to pull book after book out of his pocket when a student
tried to show off his knowledge of Greek writers. Despite his
fame as a classical scholar, he actually published little. On
September 25, 1808, three months before reaching age 49,
Porson died.
① 1759년 크리스마스에 태어났다.
② Euripides가 쓴 희곡 4편을 편집했다.
③ 고전 문학에 관한 수많은 책을 수집했다.
④ 책에 대한 열정과 관련된 일화가 있다.
⑤ 명성에 걸맞게 많은 책을 출판했다.
26. 수영 강사 모집에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 프로그램은 8월 1일부터 5주간 계속된다.
② 지원자의 나이 제한이 없다.
③ 지원자는 어린이를 가르친 경험이 있어야 한다.
④ 이메일로 지원서를 제출할 수 없다.
⑤ 추가 문의는 전화로만 할 수 있다.
27. 11th ANNUAL GRAD CELEBRATION에 관한 다음
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 음악 공연이 포함된다.
② 친구를 두 명까지 데려올 수 있다.
③ 복장 제한이 없다.
④ 입장료는 한 명당 20달러이다.
⑤ 학생회에서 주최한다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
The Internet and communication technologies play an
ever-increasing role in the social lives of young people in
developed societies. Adolescents have been quick to immerse
themselves in technology with most ① using the Internet to
communicate. Young people treat the mobile phone as an
essential necessity of life and often prefer to use text messages
to communicate with their friends. Young people also
② increasingly access social networking websites. As
technology and the Internet are a familiar resource for young
people, it is logical ③ what they would seek assistance from
this source. This has been shown by the increase in websites
that provide therapeutic information for young people. A
number of ‘youth friendly’ mental health websites ④have
been developed. The information ⑤ presented often takes the
form of Frequently Asked Questions, fact sheets and suggested
links. It would seem, therefore, logical to provide online
counselling for young people.
Looking for Swimming Instructors
The Little Swimmers Program is now looking for
swimming instructors.
－ It is a summer vacation swimming program for
children aged 8-10.
－ It is a 4-week program beginning on August 1.
Requirements
－ Over 20 years of age
－ Previous experience in teaching children
－ Lifeguard and first aid certifications
Applicants should download the application form from
the website at www.littleswimmersclub.com. After
completing the form, submit it by e-mail at lsp@me.com
no later than July 15. For additional inquiries, please
contact us at 123-456-7890 or visit our website.
11th ANNUAL GRAD CELEBRATION
Graduating students, it’s party time! Come and join
us. We’ll make the last unforgettable memories of our
high school life. The celebration includes dinner, a
photo slide show, music performances and dancing.
You can bring up to two friends.
∙Time & Date: 7:00 p.m. on May 22
∙Location: Westhampton High School Gym
∙Dress Code: Formal wear
∙Entrance Fee: $20 per person
This event is hosted by the Student Council. For more
info, see the website: www.westhamptonhs.wsh.org.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
An Egyptian executive, after entertaining his Canadian
guest, offered him joint partnership in a new business venture.
The Canadian, delighted with the offer, suggested that they
meet again the next morning with their ① respective lawyers to
finalize the details. The Egyptian never showed up. The
surprised and disappointed Canadian tried to understand what
had gone wrong: Did Egyptians ② lack punctuality? Was the
Egyptian expecting a counter-offer? Were lawyers unavailable
in Cairo? None of these explanations proved to be correct;
rather, the problem was ③ caused by the different meaning
Canadians and Egyptians attach to inviting lawyers. The
Canadian regarded the lawyers’ ④ absence as facilitating the
successful completion of the negotiation; the Egyptian
interpreted it as signaling the Canadian’s mistrust of his
verbal commitment. Canadians often use the impersonal
formality of a lawyer’s services to finalize ⑤ agreements.
Egyptians, by contrast, more frequently depend on the personal
relationship between bargaining partners to accomplish the
same purpose.
* punctuality: 시간 엄수
30. 밑줄 친 him[his]이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Dad just laughed and walked out of the room still holding
Slade in his arms. He had dressed him and now he put ① him
in his chair. As Slade sat in his chair eating a biscuit that Dad
had spread with butter and homemade strawberry jam, Mom
walked into the kitchen. She took one look at her little boy and
started laughing; ② his little face and hands were covered with
biscuit and jam. She thought how really cute he was. “Honey,
what have you done? Look at him. I will never get ③ him
clean again. I guess when he gets through eating you can take
④ him out and dump him in the bathtub.” Dad laughed. Slade
giggled and tried to spit biscuit all over Dad. It didn’t hit
⑤ him because luckily he avoided the spray. That made Mom
laugh even more and soon the little cabin was full of love and
laughter.
[31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Early human societies were nomadic, based on hunting and
gathering, and, in a shifting pattern of life in search of new
sources of food, qualities such as lightness, portability, and
adaptability were dominant criteria. With the evolution of more
settled rural societies based on agriculture, other characteristics,
other traditions of form appropriate to the new patterns of life,
rapidly emerged. It must be emphasized, however, that tradition
was not static, but constantly subject to minute variations
appropriate to people and their circumstances. Although
traditional forms reflected the experience of social groups,
specific manifestations could be adapted in various minute and
subtle ways to suit individual users’ needs. A chair could keep
its basic, accepted characteristics while still being closely
shaped in detail to the physique and proportions of a specific
person. This basic principle of allowed a
constant stream of incremental modifications to be introduced,
which, if demonstrated by experience to be advantageous, could
be integrated back into the mainstream of tradition. [3점]
* manifestation: 외적 형태, 표시
** physique: 체격
*** incremental: (점진적으로) 증가하는
① dedication ② customization
③ cooperation ④ generalization
⑤ preservation
32. Investigators as a personality type place a high value on
science, process, and learning. They excel at research, using
logic and the information gained through their senses to
conquer complex problems. Nothing thrills them more than a
“big find.” Intellectual, introspective, and exceedingly
detail-oriented, investigators are happiest when they’re using
their brain power to pursue what they deem as a worthy
outcome. They , and they
dislike overly structured environments that necessitate a set
response to challenges. Investigators are not interested in
leadership, and developing the interpersonal skills necessary
to fuel collaboration is a hurdle for many of them. They may
feel insecure in their ability to “keep up” in their fields and
can react badly when forced to put more important work on
hold to complete a task that doesn’t intrigue them. [3점]
* introspective: 자기 성찰적인
** deem: 여기다, 생각하다
① attempt to go with the flow
② prefer to march to their own beat
③ dare to take the lead from the front
④ tend to work shoulder to shoulder
⑤ pay more attention to assigned tasks
6
6
8
33. It is easy to find examples of correlations which are far
more systematic than could occur by chance and yet which it
would be absurd to treat as evidence of a direct causal link. For
instance, there is a high degree of correlation between shoe
size and vocabulary size: people with larger shoe sizes tend to
have much larger vocabularies than people with smaller shoe
sizes. But having larger feet does not cause anyone to gain a
larger vocabulary; nor does having a large vocabulary cause
your feet to grow. The obvious explanation of the correlation
is that children tend to have much smaller feet than adults, and,
because children acquire their vocabularies gradually as they
grow older, it is hardly surprising that, on average, people with
smaller feet have smaller vocabularies. In other words, foot
size and vocabulary size can be explained in terms of
from infancy
to adulthood: a cause which both observed phenomena have in
common. [3점]
① by-products of language acquisition
② causal links between uncommon events
③ contrasts between physical and mental growth
④ cultural beliefs derived from social interactions
⑤ features of the process of human development
34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Feedback is usually most effective when you offer it at the
earliest opportunity, particularly if your objective is to teach
someone a skill. (A) , if you are teaching your
friend how to make your famous egg rolls, you provide a
step-by-step commentary as you watch your pupil. If he makes
a mistake, you don’t wait until the egg rolls are finished to tell
him that he left out the cabbage. He needs immediate feedback
to finish the rest of the sequence successfully. Sometimes,
(B) , if a person is already sensitive and upset about
something, delaying feedback can be wise. Use your critical
thinking skills to analyze when feedback will do the most
good. Rather than automatically offering immediate correction,
use the just-in-time approach and provide feedback just before
the person might make another mistake.
(A) (B)
① For example …… however
② For example …… as a result
③ In addition …… in fact
④ Similarly …… moreover
⑤ Similarly …… therefore
[35～36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
35.
If you walk into a store looking for a new computer and
the first salesperson you meet immediately points to a
group of computers and says, “Any of those are good,”
and then walks away, there is a good chance you will walk
away, too, and with good reason.
(A) That is, the reader is the writer’s “customer” and one
whose business or approval is one we need to seek. The
more you know about your reader, the greater the chances
you will meet his or her needs and expectations.
(B) Why? You were never asked what you were seeking, how
much you could spend, or if the computer would be used
for business or pleasure or your child’s homework
assignments.
(C) In brief, the salesperson never considered or asked about
your needs and preferences. Just as it would come as no
surprise to learn the salesperson who was indifferent to a
potential customer’s needs was soon out of a job, the
same holds true for writers who ignore their readers.
① (A)－(C)－(B) ② (B)－(A)－(C)
③ (B)－(C)－(A) ④ (C)－(A)－(B)
⑤ (C)－(B)－(A)
36.
According to one traditional definition, aesthetics is the
branch of philosophy that deals with beauty, especially
beauty in the arts. Examining the pleasing features of the
Mona Lisa or a snow-capped mountain, for example,
would come under aesthetics.
(A) Consider Picasso’s Guernica, a huge (11-ft. × 25.6-ft.)
painting in black, white, and grey that he made in
response to the slaughter of Spanish civilians by German
and Italian warplanes during the Spanish Civil War.
Images of a cruel war dominate the canvas.
(B) That definition seems too narrow, however, since works of
art and natural objects may interest us in other ways than by
being beautiful. Instead of evoking admiration of beauty,
artists may evoke puzzlement, shock, and even disgust.
(C) This work is widely admired but not for being beautiful.
So a better definition of aesthetics would be that it is the
branch of philosophy that deals with the ways things
please people in being experienced.
* slaughter: 대량 학살
① (A)－(C)－(B) ② (B)－(A)－(C)
③ (B)－(C)－(A) ④ (C)－(A)－(B)
⑤ (C)－(B)－(A)
7
7
8
[37～38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37.
Analysis of the errors leads the teacher to modify the
teaching of these procedures, using the language ‘seven
and three more’ rather than ‘seven, count on three’.
A 5-year-old doing addition problems by counting on makes
the same error repeatedly, with responses such as: 7 + 3 = 9,
6 + 5 = 10 and 8 + 4 = 11. ( ① ) The teacher asks the pupil to
show how these answers were obtained and notices that in
doing the addition of 3 to 7, the pupil counts ‘seven, eight,
nine’, while turning up three fingers in turn. ( ② ) The pupil
is ‘counting on 3 from 7’ but incorrectly starting at 7. ( ③ )
The teacher recalls similar errors that some pupils made when
doing addition problems by counting on along a number
line. ( ④ ) This is immediately effective. ( ⑤ ) So the
teacher reinforces this particular language pattern in
subsequent oral work with the whole class.
38.
Still, many believe we will eventually reach a point at
which conflict with the finite nature of resources is
inevitable.
Can we sustain our standard of living in the same ecological
space while consuming the resources of that space? This
question is particularly relevant since we are living in an era
of skyrocketing fuel costs and humans’ ever-growing carbon
footprints. ( ① ) Some argue that we are already at a
breaking point because we have nearly exhausted the Earth’s
finite carrying capacity. ( ② ) However, it’s possible that
innovations and cultural changes can expand Earth’s capacity.
( ③ ) We are already seeing this as the world economies are
increasingly looking at “green,” renewable industries like
solar and hydrogen energy. ( ④ ) That means survival could
ultimately depend on getting the human population below its
carrying capacity. ( ⑤ ) Otherwise, without population
control, the demand for resources will eventually exceed an
ecosystem’s ability to provide it. [3점]
39. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Scientific experiments should be designed to show that your
hypothesis is wrong and should be conducted completely
objectively with no possible subjective influence on the
outcome. ① Unfortunately few, if any, scientists are truly
objective as they have often decided long before the
experiment is begun what they would like the result to be.
② This means that very often bias is (unintentionally)
introduced into the experiment, the experimental procedure or
the interpretation of results. ③ It is all too easy to justify to
yourself why an experiment which does not fit with your
expectations should be ignored, and why one which provides
the results you ‘hoped for’ is the right one. ④ It is important
to draw a meaningful result from the experiment on peer
group activities. ⑤ This can be partly avoided by conducting
experiments ‘blinded’ and by asking others to check your data
or repeat experiments.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Certain species are more crucial to the maintenance of
their ecosystem than others. Such species, called keystone
species, are vital in determining the nature and structure of
the entire ecosystem. The fact that other species depend on
or are greatly affected by the keystone species is revealed
when the keystone species is removed. It is in this sense
that we should draw attention to fig trees. Different species
of fig trees may be keystone species in tropical rain
forests. Although figs collectively produce a continuous
crop of fruits, fruit-eating monkeys, birds, bats, and other
vertebrates of the forest do not normally consume large
quantities of figs in their diets. During the time of year
when other fruits are less plentiful, however, fig trees
become important in sustaining fruit-eating vertebrates.
Should the fig trees disappear, most of the fruit-eating
vertebrates would be eliminated. Protecting fig trees in
such tropical rainforest ecosystems is an important
conservation goal because it increases the likelihood that
monkeys, birds, bats, and other vertebrates will survive.
* fig: 무화과
** vertebrate: 척추동물

As a keystone species in tropical rain forests, fig trees
support fruit-eating animals’ survival when other fruits are
(A) , and thus (B) their ecosystem.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① insufficient …… preserve ② insufficient …… create
③ poisonous …… purify ④ poisonous …… reshape
⑤ abundant …… clean
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
True understanding inevitably requires a knowledge of
context. The proper way of understanding a beast in a zoo is
a telling example. At the zoo, visitors may witness a great
beast pacing behind the bars of its cage. They may observe
and admire the creature, its amazing bone structure, and its
magnificent coat. However, no matter how long visitors
spend in front of that cage, they will never truly understand
the beast. True understanding can only come from seeing the
creature in its natural surroundings and, in turn, the ways in
which its presence affects its environment.
What is true of the mysterious beast in the zoo is also true
of science. To fully understand science, it must be
considered within the society in which it functions. Science
is not conducted in a . It is embedded within a
social fabric, and just as a flesh-and-blood beast influences
and is influenced by its environment, so too do science and
society mutually influence one another. Society, through
ethical and economic constraints, exerts a powerful influence
on what science accomplishes. At the same time, the results
of science have profound, and sometimes unexpected,
impacts on every human being on earth. Therefore, to make
sense of science-related issues, it is critical to recognize the
bidirectional relationship between science and society.
* exert: 행사하다, 발휘하다
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Animal Society: A Mirror of Ourselves
② A New Perspective for Studying Zoology
③ What Has Science Done for You Recently?
④ Why Does Science Need Critical Thinking?
⑤ Understanding Science: Society Does Matter
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① vacuum ② pattern ③ moment
④ community ⑤ conflict
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Peter Anderson was exhausted when he finally opened the
front door of his apartment. He teaches first graders, which
means he lives in a world of riddles, birthday cakes, and
pointless stories. (a) His world is dominated by 6-year-olds.
Throwing himself with his leather bag on the long,
comfortable sofa, he closed his eyes and reviewed the events
of the day.
(B)
It was held in a seminar room where Anderson met the
principal for the first time three years ago. The principal
asked why he chose to work with young children. (b) He
answered that he loved helping children learn to write their
names for the first time, finding someone a new friend, and
sharing in the joy of reading. But, as time passed, his
commitment and passion seemed to fade gradually. He
recalled his strong conviction during the interview.
(C)
That’s why Anderson took the job in the first place even
though some of his friends attempted to persuade him to be a
lawyer or businessman. (c) He shook his head and opened his
eyes. As he struggled to get up, he saw something fall from his
bag. It was a birthday card from his students, decorated with
all kinds of odd-shaped but colorful hearts and scribbled
names. “Dear Mr. Anderson, happy birthday to you. It’s our
surprise gift for you. We love you!” Anderson could not help
but smile. He already felt much better.
(D)
Today was especially busy and wearying, and Anderson
wondered whether he was really suitable for teaching. He was
stressed as kids constantly sought (d) his attention. At snack
time, Emily wanted him to open her milk carton, so he did. As
she was drinking, Scott spilled his milk and Anderson had to
help (e) him clean it up. Then Jenny, Andrew, Mark, and . . . .
Kids never ceased. However, he still loved them. That’s also
what he had said in the interview for the position.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)－(D)－(C) ② (C)－(B)－(D)
③ (C)－(D)－(B) ④ (D)－(B)－(C)
⑤ (D)－(C)－(B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Anderson에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 1학년 학생들을 가르친다.
② 인터뷰 때 가졌던 강한 확신을 떠올렸다.
③ 친구들로부터 법률가나 사업가가 되라는 권유를 받았다.
④ 가방에서 떨어진 생일 카드는 부모님으로부터 온 것이었다.
⑤ 간식 시간에 Emily의 우유팩을 열어 주었다.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, thanks. I’ll have one later.
② Sure. Take as many as you want.
③ Well, he’s quite a diligent farmer.
④ Sorry, but apples aren’t my favorite.
⑤ Good idea. Let’s buy them at the market.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Don’t worry. The forecast says it’ll clear up soon.
② You’re too late. Your flight already departed.
③ Then, I’d like to get a refund for this ticket.
④ That’s right. We can reschedule your meeting.
⑤ No problem. We’ll change your seat to the aisle side.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 컴퓨터 사용 시 올바른 자세에 대해 조언하려고
② 컴퓨터 사용 중 휴식의 필요성을 강조하려고
③ 컴퓨터 사용 관련 절전 요령을 설명하려고
④ 회사 내 컴퓨터 보안 강화 방침을 안내하려고
⑤ 직장 내 컴퓨터 개인 용무 사용 자제를 당부하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 교사는 수업 시 학생들의 개인차를 고려할 필요가 있다.
② 원만한 교우 관계는 학습 동기를 강화시킨다.
③ 게임을 이용한 수업은 학습에 도움이 된다.
④ 효과적인 수업을 위한 게임 개발이 중요하다.
⑤ 조용한 학습 분위기가 수업 진행에 필수적이다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 치과 접수원 － 환자 ② 보건 교사 － 학생
③ 심리 상담사 － 내담자 ④ 약사 － 제약 회사 직원
⑤ 보험 설계사 － 고객
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학급 친구들 인터뷰하기
② 조별 발표 순서 정하기
③ 인터넷 자료 검색하기
④ 발표 주제 선정하기
⑤ 과학 과제 제출하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 팀 회식에 참석할 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 아버지와 저녁 식사를 해야 해서
② 어머니 병문안을 가야 해서
③ 해외 출장을 가야 해서
④ 팀 프로젝트 준비를 해야 해서
⑤ 아버지 생신 선물을 사러 가야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $27 ② $30 ③ $35 ④ $36 ⑤ $40
10. 대화를 듣고, Young Inventors Challenge에 관해 두 사람이
언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 참가 연령 ② 지원 마감일 ③ 대회 장소
④ 참가비 ⑤ 우승 상품
11. Sunnyvale Community Closet에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 비영리 단체가 운영한다.
② 기증받기 전에 기기가 작동하는지 점검한다.
③ 기기 보관을 위한 공간이 제한적이다.
④ 주말에는 오후 5시까지 연다.
⑤ 기증자에게 회원 카드를 발급한다.
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 보러 가기로 선택한
아파트를 고르시오.
Apartments in Westford Village
Apartment Number of
Bedrooms
Walking Distance
from Downtown Floor Monthly
Rental Cost
① A one 5 minutes 8th $600
② B two 5 minutes 3rd $700
③ C two 15 minutes 6th $650
④ D three 15 minutes 4th $750
⑤ E three 25 minutes 2nd $700
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① That’s too bad. The submission date has passed.
② Sure. They’ll make a back-up file just in case.
③ Trust yourself. Your efforts will pay off.
④ It’s not your fault. Wait for another chance.
⑤ No problem. The directors’ meeting was canceled.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Right. I’d like to send this package by express mail.
② Yes. I want to buy some stamps to put on this letter.
③ Great! Please give me the whole flower series now.
④ That’s good. But those aren’t the stamps you want.
⑤ Thanks! I’ll go there now before they’re sold out.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, David가 Jane에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
David:
① I’m going to hire you as my speechwriter.
② You’re the right person to give me advice.
③ I wouldn’t make a single change if I were you.
④ You should’ve written the speech on your own.
⑤ I think it’s better to soften the speech a little bit.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① avoiding insect bites in the wild
② distinguishing species of insects
③ insects’ self-protection methods
④ means of saving endangered insects
⑤ a variety of insects’ hunting techniques
17. 언급된 곤충이 아닌 것은?
① ants ② butterflies ③ beetles
④ grasshoppers ⑤ bees
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 캠프 참가를 위해 여행 일정을 조정하려고
② 캠프 참가 시기를 변경할 수 있는지 문의하려고
③ 캠프 등록 시 지불한 예치금 환불을 요구하려고
④ 캠프 일정이 분명하지 않은 것에 대해 항의하려고
⑤ 예약한 캠프 프로그램의 변경된 내용을 확인하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I’m leaving early tomorrow morning, finally! I’ve always
wanted to explore the Amazon, the unknown and mysterious
world. At this hour, the great Emerald Amazon Explorer should
be at the port waiting for me to get on board. Freshwater dolphins
will escort me on the playful river, and 500 species of birds, half
a dozen species of monkeys, and numerous colorful butterflies
will welcome me into their kingdom. I wish I could camp in the
wild and enjoy the company of mosquitos, snakes, and spiders.
I’d love to make the world’s largest rainforest home. My heart
swells as much as my chubby bags; yet, I’d better get some sleep
since a long, tough journey is ahead of me.
① excited ② exhausted ③ frustrated
④ indifferent ⑤ relieved
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Assertiveness may seem to some people to be uncharacteristic
of counselors. If your picture of a counselor is someone who
never disagrees, always “goes along,” wants everything to be
nice all the time, and only does what other people want him or
her to do, this is not a picture of an assertive counselor. Being
assertive does not have to mean being disagreeable. Being a
counselor does not mean that you should simply be silent
when someone tells a racist joke. An assertive counselor
would find a way to call that person’s attention to the fact
that the joke is racist, explaining how it offended the hearer,
and suggesting ways similar jokes could be avoided. Being
assertive is a highly developed skill ― it should fit nicely in
the counselor’s repertoire of techniques.
① 상담사는 상대방의 감정을 해치는 농담을 하지 말아야 한다.
② 상담사는 자기 생각을 분명하게 드러낼 줄도 알아야 한다.
③ 상담사는 항상 친절한 태도로 상담을 진행해야 한다.
④ 상담사는 정기적으로 상담 기술 교육을 받아야 한다.
⑤ 상담사는 상담 기록을 철저히 관리해야 한다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Dear Coach Johnson,
My name is Christina Markle, Bradley Markle’s mother.
Bradley and I were thrilled to learn that you’re holding
your Gymnastics Summer Camp again this year. So I
didn’t hesitate to sign up and pay the non-refundable
deposit for the second week program, which is from July
13 to 17. But today I remembered that our family is
going to get back from a trip on July 13, and I’m afraid
Bradley won’t be able to make it on the very first day of
the program. Rather than make him skip the day, I’d like
to check to see if he could switch to the third week
program. Please let us know if that’s possible. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Christina Markle
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
The negative effects of extrinsic motivators such as grades
have been documented with students from different cultures.
Although this matter is more complex than simply regarding
all extrinsic rewards as controlling or diminishing learning,
we agree with Richard Ryan and his colleagues that people
across different cultures are likely to express more satisfaction
with their lives when their primary goals are intrinsic rather
than extrinsic. Another consistent research finding is that
when a learning activity is undertaken explicitly to attain
some extrinsic reward, people respond by seeking the least
demanding way of ensuring the reward. Since there are three
decades of evidence that dominating instruction with a system
of controlling external rewards may contribute to inferior
learning, using a pedagogy based on theories of intrinsic
motivation appears to be a more reasonable and effective
approach to enhancing learning among culturally diverse
students.
* pedagogy: 교수법
① 적절한 외적 보상이 삶의 만족도를 향상시킨다.
② 학습자의 외적 동기와 내적 동기의 균형이 필요하다.
③ 문화적 다양성을 고려한 교육 이론의 확립이 중요하다.
④ 내적 동기의 교육적 기능에 대한 실질적인 연구가 시급하다.
⑤ 내적 동기 부여가 문화적 배경이 다른 학생들의 교육에 효과적이다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Twin sirens hide in the sea of history, tempting those
seeking to understand and appreciate the past onto the reefs of
misunderstanding and misinterpretation. These twin dangers
are temporocentrism and ethnocentrism. Temporocentrism is
the belief that your times are the best of all possible times. All
other times are thus inferior. Ethnocentrism is the belief that
your culture is the best of all possible cultures. All other
cultures are thus inferior. Temporocentrism and ethnocentrism
unite to cause individuals and cultures to judge all other
individuals and cultures by the “superior” standards of their
current culture. This leads to a total lack of perspective when
dealing with past and / or foreign cultures and a resultant
misunderstanding and misappreciation of them. Temporocentrism
and ethnocentrism tempt moderns into unjustified criticisms
of the peoples of the past.
① distinct differences in the ways of recording history
② universal features discovered in different cultures
③ historians’ efforts to advocate their own culture
④ pros and cons of two cross-cultural perspectives
⑤ beliefs that cause biased interpretations of the past
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we remark with surprise that someone “looks young”
for his or her chronological age, we are observing that we
all age biologically at different rates. Scientists have good
evidence that this apparent difference is real. It is likely that age
changes begin in different parts of the body at different times
and that the rate of annual change varies among various cells,
tissues, and organs, as well as from person to person. Unlike
the passage of time, biological aging resists easy measurement.
What we would like to have is one or a few measurable
biological changes that mirror all other biological age changes
without reference to the passage of time, so that we could say,
for example, that someone who is chronologically eighty years
old is biologically sixty years old. This kind of measurement
would help explain why one eighty-year-old has so many more
youthful qualities than does another eighty-year-old, who may
be biologically eighty or even ninety years old.
① In Search of a Mirror Reflecting Biological Aging
② Reasons for Slow Aging in the Modern Era
③ A Few Tips to Guess Chronological Age
④ Secrets of Biological Aging Disclosed
⑤ Looking for the Fountain of Youth
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the results of a survey conducted in
2012. It compares the percentage of parents of minor children
(hereafter, parents) and that of other adults in terms of their
involvement in six library activities. ①Most notably, the
percentage of parents is higher than that of other adults in all
activity types. ② The percentage of parents who browsed
shelves is the same as that of parents who borrowed print
books. ③ The percentage gap between parents and other
adults is largest in the activity of attending classes or events
for children and is smallest in the activity of using computers
or the Internet. ④ The percentage of other adults who browsed
shelves is twice as high as that of other adults who borrowed
DVDs, CDs, or videotapes. ⑤ Finally, the percentage of
parents who borrowed e-books is less than 10% but is higher
than that of other adults who did the same activity.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4
8
25. Protogenes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Known for his devotion to each of his paintings, Protogenes
was an ancient Greek painter and a rival of Apelles. He was
born in Caunus, on the coast of Caria, but lived most of his
life in Rhodes. Little else is known of him. But there are
some accounts of his paintings. The Ialysus and the Satyr
were the most well-known among his works. Protogenes spent
approximately seven years painting the Ialysus, a depiction of a
local hero of a town in Rhodes. After remaining in Rhodes for
at least 200 years, it was carried off to Rome. There later it
was destroyed by fire. Protogenes worked on the Satyr during
Demetrius Poliorcetes’ attack on Rhodes from 305 to 304 B.C.
Interestingly, the garden in which he painted the Satyr was in
the middle of the enemy’s camp. Protogenes is said to have been
about seventy years of age when the Satyr was completed.
① 고대 그리스 화가였다.
② 일생의 대부분을 Rhodes에서 지냈다.
③ Ialysus를 그리는 데 대략 7년을 보냈다.
④ 적진과 멀리 떨어진 곳에서 Satyr를 그렸다.
⑤ Satyr를 완성했을 때는 약 70세였다고 전해진다.
26. 2015 Annual Teen Programmers Conference에 관한 다음
안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 3일간 진행된다.
② 시청의 대강당에서 개최된다.
③ 12개의 개별 세미나가 열린다.
④ Total Pass에 점심 뷔페가 포함된다.
⑤ 예약하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.
27. Virginia Art Show 2015에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 스무 번째 개최되는 행사이다.
② 유명한 예술가의 작품이 전시된다.
③ 행사 첫날 Virginia Philharmonic의 공연이 있다.
④ 두 달 동안 열린다.
⑤ Virginia 주민의 무료입장이 가능하다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
The Greeks’ focus on the salient object and its attributes led
to ① their failure to understand the fundamental nature of
causality. Aristotle explained that a stone falling through the
air is due to the stone having the property of “gravity.” But of
course a piece of wood ② tossed into water floats instead of
sinking. This phenomenon Aristotle explained as being due
to the wood having the property of “levity”! In both cases
the focus is ③ exclusively on the object, with no attention
paid to the possibility that some force outside the object
might be relevant. But the Chinese saw the world as consisting
of continuously interacting substances, so their attempts to
understand it ④ causing them to be oriented toward the
complexities of the entire “field,” that is, the context or
environment as a whole. The notion ⑤ that events always
occur in a field of forces would have been completely
intuitive to the Chinese.
* salient: 현저한, 두드러진
** levity: 가벼움
2015 Annual Teen Programmers Conference
November 21 & 22, 10:00 a.m.－ 5:00 p.m.
Hosted by the Teen Programmers Association
Is the computer screen your universe? Then join our
conference held at West State University’s Brilliance
Hall, and challenge yourself! Here you’ll meet the leaders
in modern computer science.
The conference includes:
∙Lectures by renowned industry figures, including
Warwick Meade
∙10 separate seminars on hardware / software, programming,
and new applications
∙Exhibitions of their latest products by 12 major firms
Ticket Prices:
∙Total Pass: $25 (includes buffet lunch)
∙Lectures & Seminars Only: $15
∙Exhibitions Only: $10
Booking is essential. Reserve your tickets at
www.tiinprogrammers.org.
Virginia Art Show 2015
We invite you to join us at the 20th Virginia Art Show,
famed all along the east coast for the variety and quality
of its exhibits. Works by famous artists such as Mabel
Green, Theresa Peterson, and Ronald McKuen will be
displayed. The Virginia Philharmonic will perform on
the first day of the show.
Come and enjoy the fabulous drawings, sculptures,
photographs, digital works, and the great music!
∙Dates: November 1－30
∙Hours: 10:00 a.m.－9:00 p.m.
∙Place: Westchester Art Center
∙Entrance Fees:
- Adults: $15 one day
- Children: $7 one day
Free admission for Virginia residents
For further information, please visit our website at
www.virginiaartshow.org.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
The Atitlán Giant Grebe was a large, flightless bird that had
evolved from the much more widespread and smaller
Pied-billed Grebe. By 1965 there were only around 80 birds
left on Lake Atitlán. One immediate reason was easy enough
to spot: the local human population was cutting down the reed
beds at a furious rate. This (A) accommodation / destruction
was driven by the needs of a fast growing mat-making
industry. But there were other problems. An American airline
was intent on developing the lake as a tourist destination for
fishermen. However, there was a major problem with this
idea: the lake (B) lacked / supported any suitable sporting
fish! To compensate for this rather obvious defect, a specially
selected species of fish called the Large-mouthed Bass was
introduced. The introduced individuals immediately turned
their attentions to the crabs and small fish that lived in the lake,
thus (C) competing / cooperating with the few remaining
grebes for food. There is also little doubt that they sometimes
gobbled up the zebra-striped Atitlán Giant Grebe’s chicks.
* reed: 갈대
** gobble up: 게걸스럽게 먹다
(A) (B) (C)
① accommodation …… lacked …… competing
② accommodation …… supported …… cooperating
③ destruction …… lacked …… competing
④ destruction …… supported …… cooperating
⑤ destruction …… lacked …… cooperating
30. 밑줄 친 he[his]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
The dancers stood on a two-step elevated stage, so that there
was a natural gap between those who came to dance and those
who came to watch. The host randomly pulled the name of a
well-known dancer, Linx, out of a hat. People cheered.
According to the format, Linx had to “call out” another dancer
to battle him on stage. Instead of deliberately choosing
someone, however, ① he decided to select his opponent
randomly by making himself into a human spin-wheel. He
propelled himself into a backspin, covered ② his eyes, and
extended his arm above his head. When his body finally
stopped spinning, ③ his arm pointed away from the dancers
on stage and directly at Dan Tres, standing among the
spectators. The crowd erupted in “Ohhhhs!” because ④ he
was an older family man who had not danced hip-hop in many
years, while the much younger Linx was a nimble b-boy. Linx
looked embarrassed, but nonetheless ⑤ he called out the
respected elder to battle.
* nimble: 동작이 날렵한
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. When two cultures come into contact, they do not
exchange every cultural item. If that were the case, there
would be no cultural differences in the world today. Instead,
only a small number of cultural elements ever spread from
one culture to another. Which cultural item is accepted
depends largely on the item’s use and compatibility with
already existing cultural traits. For example, it is not likely
that men’s hair dyes designed to “get out the gray” will spread
into parts of rural Africa where a person’s status is elevated
with advancing years. Even when a(n) is
consistent with a society’s needs, there is still no guarantee
that it will be accepted. For example, most people in the
United States using US customary units (e.g., inch, foot, yard,
mile, etc.) have resisted adopting the metric system even
though making such a change would enable US citizens to
interface with the rest of the world more efficiently. [3점]
* metric system: 미터법
① categorization ② innovation
③ investigation ④ observation
⑤ specification
32. Some distinctions between good and bad are hardwired into
our biology. Infants enter the world ready to respond to pain as
bad and to sweet (up to a point) as good. In many situations,
however, the boundary between good and bad is a reference
point that changes over time and depends on the immediate
circumstances. Imagine that you are out in the country on a cold
night, inadequately dressed for the pouring rain, your clothes
soaked. A stinging cold wind completes your misery. As you
wander around, you find a large rock that provides some shelter
from the fury of the elements. The biologist Michel Cabanac
would call the experience of that moment intensely pleasurable
because it functions, as pleasure normally does, to indicate the
direction of .
The pleasant relief will not last very long, of course, and you
will soon be shivering behind the rock again, driven by your
renewed suffering to seek better shelter. [3점]
* shiver: 떨다
① a permanent emotional adjustment to circumstantial demands
② enhancing self-consciousness through physical suffering
③ a biologically significant improvement of circumstances
④ judging desirable and undesirable conditions impartially
⑤ a mentally pre-determined inclination for emotional stability
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6
8
33. Research and development for seed improvement has long
been a public domain and government activity for the
common good. However, private capital started to flow into
seed production and took it over as a sector of the economy,
creating an artificial split between the two aspects of the
seed’s nature: its role as means of production and its role as
product. This process gained pace after the invention of
hybrid breeding of maize in the late 1920s. Today most maize
seed cultivated are hybrids. The companies that sell them are
able to keep the distinct parent lines from farmers, and the
grain that they produce is not suited for seed saving and
replanting. The combination guarantees that farmers will
have to . In the
1990s the extension of patent laws as the only intellectual
property rights tool into the area of seed varieties started to
create a growing market for private seed companies. [3점]
* maize: 옥수수
① buy more seed from the company each season
② use more chemical fertilizer than before
③ pioneer markets for their food products
④ increase the efficiency of food production
⑤ search for ways to maintain rural communities
34. Long before Walt Whitman wrote Leaves of Grass, poets had
addressed themselves to fame. Horace, Petrarch, Shakespeare,
Milton, and Keats all hoped that poetic greatness would grant
them a kind of earthly immortality. Whitman held a similar
faith that for centuries the world would value his poems. But
to this ancient desire to live forever on the page, he added a
new sense of fame. Readers would not simply attend to the
poet’s work; they would be attracted to the greatness of his
personality. They would see in his poems a vibrant cultural
performance, an individual springing from the book with
tremendous charisma and appeal. Out of the political rallies
and electoral parades that marked Jacksonian America, Whitman
defined poetic fame in relation to the crowd. Other poets
might look for their inspiration from the goddess of poetry.
Whitman’s poet sought .
In the instability of American democracy, fame would be
dependent on celebrity, on the degree to which the people
rejoiced in the poet and his work. [3점]
* rally: 집회
① a refuge from public attention
② poetic purity out of political chaos
③ immortality in literature itself
④ the approval of his contemporaries
⑤ fame with political celebrities
[35～36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
35.
Some people make few intentional changes in life. Sure,
over time they may get fatter, gather lines, and go gray.
(A) They train for marathons, quit smoking, switch fields,
write plays, take up the guitar, or learn to tango even if
they never danced before in their lives. What is the
difference between these two groups of people?
(B) But they wear their hair the same way, buy the same
brand of shoes, eat the same breakfast, and stick to
routines for no reason other than the ease of a
comfortable, predictable life. Yet as both research and
real life show, many others do make important changes.
(C) It’s their perspective. People who change do not question
whether change is possible or look for reasons they
cannot change. They simply decide on a change they
want and do what is necessary to accomplish it.
Changing, which always stems from a firm decision,
becomes job number one.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
36.
Sometimes, after punishment has been administered a
few times, it needn’t be continued, because the mere threat
of punishment is enough to induce the desired behavior.
(A) Avoidance training, however, doesn’t always work in our
favor. For instance, a child who has been repeatedly
criticized for poor performance on math may learn to
dodge difficult math problems in order to avoid further
punishment.
(B) Unfortunately, because of this avoidance, the child fails
to develop his math skills and therefore improve the
capabilities he has, and so a vicious cycle has set in.
The avoidance must be unlearned through some positive
experiences with math in order for this cycle to be broken.
(C) Psychologists call this avoidance training because the
person is learning to avoid the possibility of a punishing
consequence. Avoidance training is responsible for many
everyday behaviors. It has taught you to carry an
umbrella when it looks like rain to avoid the punishment
of getting wet, and to keep your hand away from a hot
iron to avoid the punishment of a burn.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7
8
[37～38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37.
Surprised by the vision of an unfamiliar silhouette pushing
into the house, these dogs were using their eyes instead of
their noses.
Remember when you were little and you imagined that
adults had infinite power? Surely someone who could drive
the car, open the juice container, and reach the sink could
make it stop raining. ( ① ) I think that’s the same expectation
that we have with respect to our dogs and their ability to
smell. ( ② ) Because they are so good at using their noses,
we assume that they can smell anything, anytime. ( ③ ) But
dogs use other senses, too, and the brains of both humans
and dogs tend to intensify one sense at a time. ( ④ ) Many
owners have been snapped at by their dogs when they
returned home with a new hairdo or a new coat. ( ⑤ ) Their
noses may be remarkable, but they’re not always switched on.
38.
Even so, it is not the money per se that is valuable, but the
fact that it can potentially yield more positive experiences.
Money ― beyond the bare minimum necessary for food and
shelter ― is nothing more than a means to an end. Yet so
often we confuse means with ends, and sacrifice happiness
(end) for money (means). It is easy to do this when material
wealth is elevated to the position of the ultimate end, as it so
often is in our society. ( ① ) This is not to say that the
accumulation and production of material wealth is in itself
wrong. ( ② ) Material prosperity can help individuals, as well
as society, attain higher levels of happiness. ( ③ ) Financial
security can liberate us from work we do not find meaningful
and from having to worry about the next paycheck. ( ④ )
Moreover, the desire to make money can challenge and inspire
us. ( ⑤ ) Material wealth in and of itself does not necessarily
generate meaning or lead to emotional wealth. [3점]
* per se: 그 자체로
39. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Food intake is essential for the survival of every living
organism. The failure to detect spoiled or toxic food can
have deadly consequences. Therefore, it is not surprising that
humans use all their five senses to analyze food quality. ① A
first judgment about the value of a food source is made on
its appearance and smell. ② Food that looks and smells
attractive is taken into the mouth. ③ The value of a particular
food is an estimation of how good it is, based on its level of
vitamins, minerals, or calories. ④ Here, based on a complex
sensory analysis that is not only restricted to the sense of taste
but also includes smell, touch, and hearing, the final decision
whether to swallow or reject food is made. ⑤ Frequently,
this complex interaction between different senses is
inappropriately referred to as ‘taste’ although it should be
better called flavor perception, because it uses multiple
senses.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Performance must be judged in terms of what is under
the control of the individuals being evaluated rather than
those influences on performance that are beyond their
control. There can be broad, influential factors, sometimes
of an economic nature, that hold down the performance
of everyone being judged. One example is in sales. If there
is a general downturn in the economy and products or
services are not being purchased with the same frequency
as in the previous year, sales could be down, for example,
by an average of 15%. This 15% (actually －15%) figure
would then represent “average” performance. Perhaps the
best salesperson in the year had only a 3% drop in sales
over the previous year. Thus, “good” performance in this
situation is a smaller loss compared to some average or
norm group.
󰀻
In performance evaluation, we should consider (A)
factors affecting the individual’s performance rather than
(B) figures only.
(A) (B)
① contextual …… put aside
② contextual …… rely on
③ controllable …… put aside
④ positive …… ignore
⑤ positive …… rely on
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
We might describe science that has no known practical
value as basic science or basic research. Our exploration of
worlds such as Jupiter would be called basic science, and it is
easy to argue that basic science is not worth the effort and
expense because it has no known practical use. Of course, the
problem is that we have no way of knowing what knowledge
will be of use until we acquire that knowledge. In the middle
of the 19th century, Queen Victoria is supposed to have asked
physicist Michael Faraday what good his experiments with
electricity and magnetism were. He answered, “Madam, what
good is a baby?” Of course, Faraday’s experiments were the
beginning of the electronic age. Many of the practical uses
of scientific knowledge that fill our world ― transistors,
vaccines, plastics ― began as basic research. Basic scientific
research provides the raw materials that technology and
engineering use to solve problems.
Basic scientific research has yet one more important use
that is so valuable it seems an insult to refer to it as merely
functional. Science is the study of nature, and as we learn
more about how nature works, we learn more about what our
existence in this universe means for us. The seemingly
knowledge we gain from space probes to other
worlds tells us about our planet and our own role in the
scheme of nature. Science tells us where we are and what we
are, and that knowledge is beyond value.
* space probe: 우주탐사기(機)
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① What Does Basic Science Bring to Us?
② The Crisis of Researchers in Basic Science
③ Common Goals of Science and Technology
④ Technology: The Ultimate Aim of Basic Science
⑤ Michael Faraday, Frontiersman of the Electronic Age!
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① applicable ② impractical ③ inaccurate
④ priceless ⑤ resourceful
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
The midday sun was glorious. The high school grounds
were filled with well-dressed people, posing in fancy dresses
and suits for cheerful photographers. Congratulations, hugs,
and laughter were contagious. Hannah looked at all the
familiar faces that had been part of (a) her life for the last
few years. Soon her mother would be joining them. She
recalled the first day of school when she had stood in that
same place, in the middle of many anxious freshmen, some
of whom had become her closest friends.
(B)
“Hannah, you look so serious. What are you thinking
about?” “Oh, Mom, just, you know.” Her mother smiled.
“You’ll miss this place, won’t you?” Hannah nodded.
“Quick,” her mother said, “stand over there . . . and smile,
Hannah. You have such a pretty smile.” (b) She hurried out
her cell phone, zoomed in on her daughter, and realized
suddenly that she was looking at a young lady. “You’re all
grown-up,” she whispered. Hannah took more photos with
her teachers in the school garden. She wished all the
memories would remain in her mind forever.
(C)
Hannah struggled with the many class hours, the endless
assignments, and the exams. However, there were exciting
events like sports days and school festivals. How could (c) she
ever forget her second year! She had sung and danced with
her friends in the festival, part of a sensational performance.
After that, she had become more confident and active. Her
thoughts wandering, Hannah vaguely heard her mother’s
voice. “Here you are!” Her mother hurried over, and gave
(d) her a bundle of lilies and roses and a big hug.
(D)
That day was unusually foggy as if something mysterious
were ahead. Hannah was nervous and trembling. The principal
was energetically addressing them, talking of the challenges
and thrills of high school life, but she could not concentrate.
Later, a tall, strict-looking man introduced himself as (e) her
homeroom teacher. The classroom was old, but neat and
inviting. Hannah was seated in the fifth row, hallway side,
even though she had wanted a window seat. High school life
soon proved as challenging as the principal had predicted.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Hannah에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 다른 신입생들과 함께 운동장에 서 있었다.
② 학교 정원에서 선생님들과 사진을 찍었다.
③ 축제에서 노래를 부르고 춤을 추었다.
④ 교장 선생님의 말씀에 집중할 수가 없었다.
⑤ 교실에서 다섯 번째 줄 창가 자리에 앉았다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.


2016학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지


제3교시
영어영역
		

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.


1.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m not sure she can visit me this time.
② Definitely. She’s excited to move there soon.
③ That’s right. She’s already made plans for me.
④ I don’t think I’m the right person to guide you.
⑤ Unfortunately, she can’t go to Thailand with me.


2.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Well, I’ll just take the soup to the study for him.
② Sure, I can go with him to buy some pumpkins.
③ Okay, I’ll ask him to make some pumpkin soup.
④ I’m sorry, but I’m too busy to clean the study.
⑤ Hmm, I don’t think he likes pumpkin soup.


3.다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
①　학교 입학 절차에 대해 설명하려고
②　개교 기념 행사 참여를 권유하려고
③　등산 시 안전사고 주의를 당부하려고
④　학교 주변 등산로 이용을 안내하려고
⑤　개교 기념 행사 일정 변경을 공지하려고 


4.대화를 듣고, 남자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 공공 미술의 지나친 상업화를 막아야 한다.
② 공공 미술 작품 관리에 더 신경 써야 한다.
③ 공공 미술 설치를 위한 예산을 늘려야 한다.
④ 공공 미술은 지역 경제 발전에 기여해야 한다.
⑤ 공공 미술 작품은 지역의 특성을 반영해야 한다.


5.대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 제빵사-고객
② 기자-사진작가 
③ 요리 강사-수강생
④ 숲 해설사-탐방객 
⑤ 식료품점 주인-요리사
6.대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

①
②
③
④
⑤


7.대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to buy books for the lesson
② to sign up for a violin lesson
③ to take her son to the teacher
④ to ask her son to call the teacher 
⑤ to look for her son in the bookstore

8.대화를 듣고, 남자가 마라톤 대회에 참가하지 않는 이유를 고르시오.
①　참가 신청 시기를 놓쳐서
②　무릎 수술을 받아야 해서
③　마라톤 코스가 변경되어서
④　같이 참가할 사람이 없어서
⑤　훈련을 충분히 하지 못해서

9.대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. 
① $80	② $85	③ $95	④ $100	⑤ $105

10.대화를 듣고, MC Tower에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 개장 연도	② 즐길 거리
③ 교통편	④ 폐장 시간
⑤ 입장료

11.Spring Swimming Festival에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 3월 27일에 Paradise Beach에서 열린다.
② 연날리기 프로그램이 있다.
③ 수영 대회 참가 신청은 당일 오후 3시까지이다.
④ 수영 대회는 무료로 참가한다.
⑤ 보험은 웹사이트에서 신청해야 한다.
12.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 장난감 블록 세트를 고르시오.


Fun & Joy Toy Blocks

Set
Piece
Material
Color
Price
①
A
20
Wood
Yellow
$35
②
B
30
Foam
Green
$40
③
C
35
Wood
Yellow
$45
④
D
45
Foam
Green
$50
⑤
E
50
Foam
Blue
$55


13.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man:                                                     
① They’ll understand safety is the top priority.
② Well, it’ll be the perfect weather for camping.
③ Don’t worry about your kids. They’ll like camping.
④ I feel the same. Outdoor activities make kids tired.
⑤ I’ll be also disappointed if they can’t come with me.

14.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:                                                   
① You can be a good writer without any experience.
② I don’t think so. You should join the drama club first.
③ Yes, your drama club’s performance will be successful. 
④Absolutely. Your acting skill will help you with that job. 
⑤You have much experience in recording stories for the blind.

15.다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ellie가 Ryan에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Ellie:                                                     
① I think we should choose another interesting topic.
② Let’s stick to the topic and focus on the presentation.
③ Why don’t we come up with as many topics as possible?
④ How about entering the research competition together?
⑤We should try hard to save energy for the future.

[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how to choose the right career
② advantages of humans over robots
③ promising occupations in the future
④ jobs likely to be taken over by robots
⑤ use of robots for the safety of workers

17.언급된 직업이 아닌 것은?
① telemarketers	② cashiers
③ umpires	④ restaurant cooks
⑤ mail carriers

이제 듣기ㆍ말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.


18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Ms. Brown,
  We are thankful for the complimentary letter you have sent to us regarding our service. Letters like this keep us motivated and guide us to improve our service. We are pleased about your comment as customers’ satisfaction is the main motto of our service. It’s very rare that the customers take time to give thanks for the services, so we would like to use this letter as an example of the customer’s satisfactory remarks in our new brochure if you give us permission to do so. When people see such remarks from satisfied customers, they trust the service and products more. We hope you will help us in this regard. We will be contacting you soon to hear your decision regarding putting your remarks in the brochure.
Sincerely,
Oliver Watson

① 고객 맞춤 서비스를 홍보하려고
② 서비스 개선을 위한 제안을 부탁하려고
③ 단골 고객을 위한 특별 행사를 알리려고
④ 고객 불만 사항에 대한 시정 조치를 설명하려고
⑤ 홍보 책자에 편지를 싣는 것에 대한 허락을 구하려고

19.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we want something badly for our children, so badly that we behave in ways that aren’t helpful for our kids, it can mean we’re trying to fulfill a need for ourselves. It’s normal to feel good when your child wins, it’s normal to want him to win, but when you need him to win in order to feel good about yourself, you have a problem. For example, do you feel like having a child who is a winner proves you’re a worthwhile parent? Do you crave the recognition of being the parent of a star athlete? If you can answer yes to either question, you may be trying to feel good about yourself through your child’s athletic accomplishments. This is a very common problem. Be willing to take an honest look at yourself. The payoff is tremendous. You become a more aware sports parent who can offer true support and encouragement to your child.
① 전문가의 조언에 따라 자녀 문제에 대처하라.
② 자녀가 다양한 운동을 접할 기회를 제공하라.
③자녀가 시행착오를 통해 성장할 수 있도록 하라.
④자녀가 운동과 학습을 병행할 수 있는 환경을 조성하라.
⑤ 자기 기분을 위해 자녀의 승리를 원하는 게 아닌지 돌아보라.
20.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
The surface of the earth is different from place to place. Places differ in terms of population size, language, resources, environmental factors, industrial specialization, local history, and human activities. It is these differences from place to place that generate the demand for transportation. People want commodities that are not produced locally—for example, fruits, vegetables, televisions, shoes, paper, and thousands of other goods—and this desire generates the demand for transportation. Businesses need resources that are often not available locally, and this need generates the demand for transportation. We work, shop, and seek entertainment, for the most part, outside our own neighborhoods, necessitating a journey to work, to shop, and to visit the multiplex. Transportation enables us to carry out all these activities.
① 지역 간 차이 때문에 수송의 필요성이 생긴다.
② 경제가 발전한 나라일수록 수송 수단이 다양하다.
③경제 수준이 상승하면 여가 활동 시간이 증가한다.
④상품 가격에서 수송비가 차지하는 비중이 줄어들고 있다.
⑤ 환경 보호를 염두에 두고 교통수단을 개발할 필요가 있다.












21.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Tradition is a critical element that cannot be ignored in the creation of architecture. Tradition is the essential element that allows a new work to connect with people on an emotional and intellectual level. The recollection of the familiar is one aspect of design that produces pleasure. This feeling of pleasure or satisfaction exists because we enjoy a sense of security among things that we know and understand. References to a previous tradition are a common component of most major architectural movements. While these movements utilized new technologies and building materials, or invented new building forms, each evoked an emotional response having its roots in an earlier tradition.
① tradition as an important factor in architecture
② efforts to express feelings in various arts
③ innovation in the use of building materials
④ new technologies utilized in modern buildings
⑤ effects of technological innovations on tradition
22.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
There’s no subject you don’t have permission to write about. Students often avoid subjects close to their heart―skateboarding, cheerleading, rock music, cars―because they assume that their teachers will regard these topics as ‘stupid.’ No area of life is stupid to someone who takes it seriously. If you follow your affections, you will write well and will engage your readers. I’ve read elegant books on fishing, mountain climbing, giant sea turtles and many other subjects I didn’t think I was interested in. Write about your hobbies: cooking, gardening, photography, knitting, jogging, sailing, scuba diving. Write about your work: teaching, nursing, running a store. Write about a field you enjoyed in college and always meant to get back to: history, biography, art, archeology. No subject is too specialized if you make an honest connection with it when you write about it.
① Good Reading Leads to Good Writing
② Creativity Comes from Writing Regularly
③ Cultivation of Reading as a Lifetime Habit 
④ Take Criticism from Your Readers Seriously
⑤ Want to Write Well? Go with Your Interests





23.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
     Measures People Take to Maintain Their Physical Health

The above graph shows, by gender, the top five measures people took to maintain their physical health in 2014. ①Above all, the percentage of women was higher than that of men in all measures except in doing exercise. ②Getting enough sleep topped the list for both men and women. ③Eating healthy food was the second most common measure for women, which was true also for men. ④The percentage of the men receiving regular oral care was the same as that of the men spending time with friends and family. ⑤The percentage gap between men and women was the biggest in receiving regular oral care, and was the smallest in getting enough sleep and in doing exercise.
24.Maria Mitchell에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Maria Mitchell was born on August 1, 1818, in Nantucket, Massachusetts. Her awareness for astronomy came to life when her father began to teach her about the stars with the use of his own telescope. At twelve, she aided her father in calculating the exact moment of an annular eclipse. And at seventeen, she opened her very own school for girls, where she taught them science and math. Mitchell rocketed to the forefront of American astronomy when she spotted a comet through her telescope. For her discovery of the comet, she received a gold medal as a recognition from King Frederick VII of Denmark. This gave her worldwide fame, since the only previous women to discover a comet were the astronomers Caroline Herschel and Maria Margarethe Kirch. In 1865 Mitchell became a faculty member at Vassar College, making her the first female astronomy professor in the United States.
*annular eclipse: 금환 일식
① 아버지에게 별에 대해 배웠다.
② 여자아이들을 위한 학교를 열었다.
③ 덴마크 왕으로부터 금메달을 받았다.
④ 혜성을 발견한 최초의 여성이었다.
⑤ Vassar College의 천문학 교수가 되었다.

25.Sandhill Pet Parade에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Sandhill Pet Parade

  Just come with your pet to Madsen Field at 11 a.m., Sunday, March 13.
∎11:00 a.m. Registration	∎11:30 a.m. Parade
∎12:30 p.m. Awards 

  All pets are welcome to participate. Entry is free and no pre­registration is required.
  Pet owners’ costumes are optional but encouraged. Pet costumes are also encouraged.

  Awards will be given for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd place in each category:
∎Large dogs ∎Small dogs ∎Cats and exotic pets

Prizes & Honors include: 
∎PetSmart gift cards and Pets Hotel day camp passes
∎Riding in an open car in the Sandhill Hometown Days Parade on May 20, 2016

  For more information, contact us at info@shparade.net or at (560)135-6789.

① 시상은 오전 11시 30분에 시작한다. 
② 참가비가 있으며 사전 등록을 해야 한다.
③ 참가 의상은 애완동물과 주인 둘 다에게 필수 사항이다. 
④ 각 부문별로 3위까지 시상한다. 
⑤ Hometown Days 행진 때 마차를 타는 수상 특전이 있다.
26.Trash­to­Art 2016에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Trash­to­Art 2016

Celebrate Eco Recycling Center’s 10th anniversary by participating in a trash­to­art contest, sponsored by Hopkins Library.

How to participate:
∙Submissions will be accepted on one day only: Friday, March 25 at Hopkins Library, from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
∙Come see your art on display at Hopkins Library throughout the month of April! During this time, your artwork will be judged by our panel, as well as popular vote.

Categories:	∙Adults (18 & older)
	∙Teens (13-17)
	∙Children (6-12)
Awards: 1st, 2nd, & 3rd place in each category

Guidelines: 
∙Each participant can submit up to two entries.
∙We reserve the right to decline entries that will pose health dangers. 

  Visit ecorecycling.org or call (831)146-1483 to get more information.

① Eco Recycling Center의 10주년 기념 행사이다.
② 출품작 접수는 3월 25일 하루만 가능하다.
③ 출품작은 4월부터 두 달간 Hopkins 도서관에서 전시된다.
④ 참가자당 작품을 최대 두 개까지 제출할 수 있다.
⑤ 건강을 위협하는 출품작은 거부될 수 있다.

27.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Carlos Sanchez’s long­time friend, Frank Sandoval, had fallen on hard times and was about to lose ①his home. Frank’s wife was sick and their two small children were temporarily staying with his mother. Carlos hadn’t talked to Frank for several months and decided one day to call him and see how ②he was. When Frank confided in Carlos about his situation, Carlos immediately went to Frank’s home. When he walked in, ③he was shocked to see his friend so thin and frail. He sat down with Frank and asked him how much money ④he needed. Frank told him it was hopeless, that it was too much to pay back. Carlos pulled out his checkbook and wrote ⑤him a check for fifty thousand dollars. He told Frank that things would get better―and they did. Three years later, Frank paid Carlos back with interest.
28.(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Water has no calories, but it takes up a space in your stomach, which creates a feeling of fullness. Recently, a study found (A)
that/what
 people who drank two glasses of water before meals got full sooner, ate fewer calories, and lost more weight. You can put the same strategy to work by choosing foods that have a higher water content over those with less water. For example, the only difference between grapes and raisins (B)
is/are
 that grapes have about 6 times as much water in them. That water makes a big difference in how much they fill you up. You’ll feel much more satisfied after eating 100 calories’ worth of grapes than you would after eating 100 calories’ worth of raisins. Salad vegetables like lettuce, cucumbers, and tomatoes also have a very high water content, as (C)
are/do
 broth­based soups. 
*broth: 묽은 수프
	(A)	(B)	(C)
① that			is				are
② that			is				do
③ that			are				do
④ what			is				are
⑤ what			are				do



29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
The basic task of the preschool years is to establish a sense of competence and initiative. The core struggle is between initiative and guilt. Preschool children begin to initiate many of their own activities as they become physically and psychologically ready to engage in pursuits of their own ①choosing. If they are allowed realistic freedom to make some of their own decisions, they tend to develop a ②positive orientation characterized by confidence in their ability to initiate and follow through. If their choices are ridiculed, however, they tend to experience a sense of guilt and ultimately to withdraw from taking an ③active stance. One middle­aged woman we talked with still finds herself extremely vulnerable to being seen as ④foolish. She recalls that during her childhood family members laughed at her attempts to perform certain tasks. She took in certain messages she received from her family, and these messages greatly influenced her attitudes and actions. Even now she vividly carries these pictures in her head, and these messages ⑤cease to control her life.
30.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I opened the letter and started reading. I didn’t even read the whole thing. I read only the beginning―where it said, ‘We are pleased to inform you that you have received a scholarship that covers full tuition’―and I started jumping and running around the house. I couldn’t even believe it. I read the letter four more times. My dream school had offered me a full scholarship. That was more money than I could even imagine. All the stress, studying for exams, and staying up late to study―it was all worth it.
① disappointed	② jealous	③ sympathetic
④ annoyed	⑤ delighted


[31~33]다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31.It takes time for water to soften a sponge. When you are telling an employee, lawn service worker, your teenager, or anyone else, what it is that you want them to do, you may just have to repeat the order and instructions several times before the receiver really gets what it is you want done. That’s not bad. That’s normal communication lag. Be ___________. When you are asking someone a question, in an effort to learn a fact that you feel is important for you to know, but they just don’t seem to be willing to give you an answer, take it as a signal that you need to rephrase your question a little and repeat it again, and again, and again, until finally you are heard and answered.
①　patient	②　honest	③　critical
④　thankful	⑤　curious 


32.History is a discipline. It is the art of __________________. As historian John Tosh writes, “All the resources of scholarship and all the historian’s powers of imagination must be harnessed to the task of bringing the past to life—or resurrecting it.” The past is messy, but historians make sense of the mess by collecting evidence, making meaning of it, and organizing it into some kind of discernible pattern. History is an exciting act of interpretation—taking the facts of the past and weaving them into a compelling narrative. The historian works closely with the stuff that has been left behind—documents, oral testimony, objects—to make the past come alive. As John Arnold has noted, “The sources do not ‘speak for themselves’ and never have done so.... They come alive when the historian reanimates them.” [3점]
*discernible: 식별할 수 있는
① predicting the future
② enlightening the youth
③ reconstructing the past
④ analyzing the present
⑤ improving humanity
33.While there is no denying that exceptional players like Emmitt Smith can put points on the board and enhance team success, new research suggests there is a limit to the benefit top talents bring to a team. Researchers compared the amount of individual talent on teams with the teams’ success, and they found striking examples of _________________________________________. The researchers looked at three sports: basketball, soccer, and baseball. In each sport, they calculated both the percentage of top talent on each team and the teams’ success over several years. For both basketball and soccer, they found that top talent did in fact predict team success, but only up to a point. Furthermore, there was not simply a point of diminishing returns with respect to top talent; there was in fact a cost. Basketball and soccer teams with the greatest proportion of elite athletes performed worse than those with more moderate proportions of top level players. [3점]
*diminishing returns: 수확 체감
① more talent hurting the team
② practice leading to perfection
③ top players being more cooperative
④ coaches being the key to team management
⑤ supporters interrupting the flow of the game


34.다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
[3점]
Healthy living in individuals lays the foundation for healthy living throughout society and the world. For instance, healthy relationships depend upon healthy individuals sharing personally and working mutually to develop win­win agreements on how to grow and maintain the relationship.        (A)   , healthy parenting depends upon healthy parents. Children learn the foundations of how the world works and how to develop their personal reality relative to the consciousness and behaviors of their parents. They model and subconsciously embrace much of their parents’ behavior, so it becomes their own. Thus, the beliefs and behaviors of parents provide psychological and social information to the children that function almost like food does for the body; in this case, the information helps build their personal realities and shape their behaviors.    (B)   , psychological, social, as well as the physical diets provided by parents must all be healthy or the children learn to repeat the unhealthy patterns of their parents.
	(A)	     (B)
① Similarly			On the contrary
② Similarly			Consequently
③ For example			On the contrary
④ However			Otherwise
⑤ However			Consequently
[35~36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
35.

  Gold is a relatively soft metal, so much so that rings are very rarely made from pure gold metal because they get scratched quickly.

(A)The answer is that they sit inside the gold crystal structure, taking the place of a gold atom, and it is this atom substitution inside the crystal lattice of the gold that makes it stronger.
(B)But if you alloy gold, by adding a small percentage of other metals such as silver or copper, you not only change the color of the gold—silver making the gold whiter, and copper making the gold redder—you make the gold harder, much harder. 
(C)This changing of the properties of metals by very small additions of other ingredients is what makes the study of metals so fascinating. In the case of gold alloys, you might wonder where the silver atoms go. 
*crystal lattice: 결정격자    **alloy: 합금(하다)
① (A)－(C)－(B)	② (B)－(A)－(C)
③ (B)－(C)－(A)	④ (C)－(A)－(B)
⑤ (C)－(B)－(A)

36.

  A female lawyer working for a prestigious New York law firm once accompanied the male CEO of a major client to Latin America to negotiate a complex deal.

(A)It was the local practice, the colleague suggested, for lawyers to negotiate only with other lawyers, not with the businesspeople. Had the woman lawyer insisted on participating, she would have spoiled the deal and destroyed her credibility.
(B)Before voicing her objections, however, she called a colleague back in New York, who told her that he, too, had been excluded from preliminary talks during his last negotiation in that country. The Latin American executive was just looking for a diplomatic way to get her out of the picture as a lawyer, not as a woman.
(C)Soon after they arrived, the head of the prospective Latin American partner suggested that he and the CEO go off together to discuss business―while his wife and the lawyer go shopping. The lawyer was outraged, assuming this to be an example of Latin American gender bias.
① (A)－(C)－(B)	② (B)－(A)－(C)
③ (B)－(C)－(A)	④ (C)－(A)－(B)
⑤ (C)－(B)－(A)
[37~38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37.

People who struggle in retirement are those who still have a “get rich quick” mentality.

The most successful retirees are those who look at retirement as a long endeavor that can last 20 or 30 years or longer. (①) They don’t throw all of their years of preparation away by investing in the next “hot stock” or investment idea. (②) They’re very careful with their finances; they know they have to make sure that their money will last for the rest of their lives. (③) They stay conservative and focused on a finish line that is years and years away. (④) Even though they no longer have the comfort of a paycheck coming in, they still put their retirement nest egg at risk by chasing every hot tip that they get. (⑤) In other words, they are looking for short cuts to bring them financial stability and peace of mind.
*nest egg: 노후 자금






38.

However, during the same period, there has been no comparable worldwide advance in ethical behavior.

Over the past century, society has witnessed extraordinary advances in medicine, science, and technology. (①) These advances came about because an individual, or many individuals, used the full resources of his or her intellectual imagination to solve problems that had previously been thought to be unsolvable. (②) That is, in part, because human beings rarely use the full resources of their intellect to solve moral problems. (③) Exercising moral imagination means using our intelligence to devise creative and innovative ways to help others. (④) Concerning charity, for example, it means not only providing immediate assistance to the impoverished, but also helping the poor in ways that will enable them to support themselves and no longer need help. (⑤) Therefore, in any situation in which help is required, we should use our intelligence to discover the most effective and loving way to help those in need. [3점]
*impoverished: 빈곤한
39.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
By some estimates, music based on oral tradition had previously seldom been performed for more than one or two generations. ①By contrast, with the coming of records not only were the “classics” preserved, but formerly ephemeral “hits” could now survive as “oldies.” ②So the music of one generation’s youth could be replayed years later to evoke memories in some (often quite narrow) age group of people. ③Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms of course survived well beyond their social and cultural settings, taking on new meanings in the recordable world. ④Bach mostly followed the complex rules of his day, while Beethoven challenged the rules, thus creating a new musical era. ⑤Memories of falling in love or just being free and having fun also came to be linked to tunes that could be recalled or replayed again and again throughout life, thanks to the recording.
*ephemeral: 수명이 짧은

40.다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

  People tell about their own experiences all the time, but they do not necessarily tell about the same experience in the same way every time. The telling process, even in the relating of a firsthand experience, can be a highly inventive process. That is, the art of storytelling involves finding good ways to express one’s experiences in a way appropriate to the listener. A fine line exists, therefore, between invented stories and the relation of firsthand experiences. The entertainment factor exists in relating firsthand experiences just as it does in inventing stories. Nobody wants to listen to what happened to you today unless you can make what happened appear interesting. The process of livening up an experience can involve simply telling that experience in such a way as to eliminate the dullest parts, or it also can involve ‘improving’ the dull parts by playing with the facts.
*relate: 이야기하다

󰀻

When we narrate our firsthand experiences, we tend to   (A) what happened in order to make our story (B)   for the listeners.

	(A)	      (B)
① modify			reliable
② modify			enjoyable
③ reveal			reliable
④ memorize			enjoyable
⑤ memorize			comprehensible
[41~42]다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

  Ta­Nahesi Coates, a senior editor at The Atlantic Monthly, ran a personal blog for years. Coates posts daily on a wide array of subjects: movies, politics, economic inequalities, the Civil War, TV shows, favorite poems, or whether pro football is too dangerous to play. Coates, who is African American, is also well known as an eloquent writer on race, and he posts about that frequently. Yet his blog is amazingly abuse­free: comments spill into the hundreds without going off the rails. “This is the most hot­button issue in America, and folks have managed to keep a fairly level head,” he says. 
  The secret is the work Coates puts into his discussion board. Before he was a blogger himself, he’d noticed the terrible comments at his favorite political blogs. Coates realized that negative comments create a loop: they poison the atmosphere, chasing off productive posters. So when he started his own personal blog, he decided to break that loop. The instant he saw something abusive, he’d delete it, banning repeat offenders. Meanwhile, he went out of his way to encourage the smart folks, responding to them personally and publicly, so they’d be encouraged to stay and talk. And Coates was unfailingly polite and courteous himself, to help set community standards. Soon several dozen regular commenters emerged, and they got to know each other, talking as much to each other as to Coates. Their cohesion helped cement the culture of            even more; anyone today who looks at the blog can quickly tell this community isn’t going to tolerate nastiness. 

41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
① A Successful Blogger Knows How to Manage Comments
② Blogging Is a Good Way to Promote Your Business
③ Blog: A Window to See Another Foreign Culture
④ Share Hobbies with People Through Your Blog
⑤ Personal Information Slips Out of Your Blog

42.윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① civility	② competition	③ independence
④ disbelief	⑤ privacy

[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

  The last Saturday of each month was always a highlight in Adrian’s life. He and his dad had a regular fishing date. Adrian learned a lot about fishing and about life on these expeditions. (a)His father pointed out that there are some rocks that are too dangerous to go onto, even when the sea looks calm. It might look like a perfect spot for fishing, but rocks that are too close to the water’s edge can be deceptively dangerous.

(B)

  When he did so, he started catching really big fish―and his mom was delighted with the fresh fish she could cook for supper. Adrian gradually realized that it pays to listen to people with experience and knowledge of dangerous places. He also realized how stupid it was not to listen to his dad who gave (b)him precious advice free of charge!

(C)

  On top of that, (c)he soon knew exactly how to make fishermen’s knots and how to untie tricky knots in his fishing lines. But Adrian wasn’t always keen to take his dad’s advice. When his dad showed him how to bait his hook, (d)he said that a little piece of the hook should always stick out, but Adrian thought otherwise. He thought it logical for the bait to hide the hook, so he ignored his dad―but after quite a few days of catching nothing, decided to follow his dad’s advice.

(D)

  Many careless fishermen had lost their lives on these rocks. Concrete crosses marked the spots where these people had been swept into the sea. Adrian had had a few narrow escapes when he had ventured too close to the edge. (e)He quickly learned to respect the mighty waters of the ocean. Adrian’s dad also taught him which kinds of bait were suitable for catching various kinds of fish, and he also learned which sinkers were right for the different fishing areas.
*sinker: (낚싯줄의) 추, 봉돌

43.주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C)	② (C)-(B)-(D)
③ (C)-(D)-(B)	④ (D)-(B)-(C)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)

44.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c) 	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글의 Adrian에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 아버지와 함께 정기적으로 낚시를 갔다.
② 올라가면 너무 위험한 바위가 몇 군데 있다는 말을 들었다.
③ 큰 물고기를 잡아 어머니께 드려 어머니를 기쁘게 했다.
④ 아버지의 조언에 따랐지만 며칠간 아무것도 잡지 못했다.
⑤ 물고기의 종류에 따라 어떤 미끼가 적합한지 배웠다.


※확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인하시오.


1
8
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Actually, Mom’s not here.
② Yes, he’s coming home soon.
③ Right. I won’t go to the party.
④ No, we didn’t order the gift yet.
⑤ Great. Let’s buy one at the store.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll never be late for class again.
② Right. You’ve got lots of time to finish.
③ Really? I’d better get started right away.
④ What? I’ve already written up the report.
⑤ I see. I hope you can finish yours by tomorrow.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 학생회장 선거를 홍보하려고
② 교통 봉사 참여를 독려하려고
③ 무단 횡단 자제를 당부하려고
④ 안전 교육 일정을 안내하려고
⑤ 주차 문제 해결을 촉구하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 점심시간 중 여가 활동의 장점
② 직장 동료들과 잘 지내는 방법
③ 스트레스 해소와 건강과의 관계
④ 독서가 정신 건강에 미치는 효과
⑤ 밴드 공연 시 악기 구성의 중요성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 아나운서 － 리포터
② 출판업자 － 소설가
③ 신문 편집자 － 만화가
④ 잡지 기자 － 문학 비평가
⑤ 영화 제작자 － 시나리오 작가
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 예약 날짜 변경하기 ② 할인 쿠폰 출력하기
③ 레스토랑 예약하기 ④ 기념사진 촬영하기
⑤ 저녁상 차리기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 조퇴하려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 운전면허 시험에 응시하려고
② 동생을 집에 데려다 주려고
③ 부모님 댁을 방문하려고
④ 병원 진료를 받으려고
⑤ 워크숍에 참석하려고
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $270 ② $290 ③ $300 ④ $320 ⑤ $360
10. 대화를 듣고, Sunrise Korean Folk Village 관광에 관해
두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 체험 활동 내용 ② 참가 비용
③ 식사 포함 여부 ④ 참가 인원수
⑤ 소요 시간
11. Pine Tree Family Park에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① Evergreen 호숫가에 위치하고 있다.
② 두 달 전에 새롭게 단장했다.
③ 1인당 입장료를 인하했다.
④ 셔틀버스를 30분마다 운행한다.
⑤ 공원 크기를 늘렸다.
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 침낭을 고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Cheer up! You’ll do better next time.
② Sure. Let’s go to the rock concert together.
③ I agree. The advanced level is right for you.
④ You’re doing a good job. We’re almost there.
⑤ Come on! Once you see it, you’ll want to try it.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Right. We can’t ignore complaints about the staff.
② Of course. Air conditioners will be very expensive.
③ Yeah, but it’s important to keep our students happy.
④ Then, I’ll teach you how to use the computer program.
⑤ Really? Sorry to hear the computer classes will be closed.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Mike가 Susan에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Mike:
① I had a great time shopping at the market.
② I wouldn’t change my mind if I were you.
③ You can repair your camera at the department store.
④ You should go to the department store this weekend.
⑤ I wish I had gone to the electronics market with you.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① effects and uses of colors
② functions and uses of shapes
③ ways of constructing buildings
④ types and purposes of buildings
⑤ color preferences and personalities
17. 언급된 장소가 아닌 것은?
① 은행 ② 호텔 ③ 병원 ④ 학교 ⑤ 사무실
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Ms. Molly Oliver,
This is Mark Foster, one of the volunteers for the
Auditory Frog and Toad Survey. Unfortunately, I was not
able to participate in the orientation last weekend, so I
could not receive training in distinguishing the sounds of
frogs and toads. I heard from another participant that a CD
was used in the training session. I was wondering if you
could send me one. Since we have ten more days before
the survey begins, I’ll have enough time to receive and use
the CD to train myself. You can send it to me at the
address in my application. I am looking forward to hearing
from you soon. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Mark Foster
① 자원 봉사 참가를 취소하려고
② CD를 보내 줄 수 있는지 문의하려고
③ 신청서에 기입한 주소를 수정하려고
④ 양서류 생태 조사 일정을 확인하려고
⑤ 오리엔테이션에 참석할 수 없음을 알리려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘she’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
When she heard the dogs barking fiercely on the floor just
above her, she trembled uncontrollably for fear of being
caught. Drops of cold sweat rolled down her back. Before
slipping into the hold of the boat, she had scattered powder,
which Swedish scientists had developed, unnoticeably on the
floor above in order to distract the dogs. But she knew that
these dogs were so well trained that they could smell her, even
though a load of fish had been dumped over her hiding place.
She held her hands together tightly and tried not to make any
noise. She was not sure how long she could stay like that. To
her relief, it wasn’t long before a whistle called the dogs out,
leaving her unfound. She relaxed her hands and exhaled a
deep breath. She felt safe now.
① terrified → relieved ② delighted → frustrated
③ scared → annoyed ④ bored → excited
⑤ disappointed → exhausted
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Have you ever met someone while you were experiencing
significant emotional, psychological, or physical stress?
Perhaps you stayed up all night studying for a final, or maybe
you learned that a grandparent recently died. You likely
exhibited behaviors that are not consistent with how you
usually act. Meeting someone when you are extremely
stressed can create an inaccurate impression of you. For this
reason, recognize that our first impressions of others also may
be perceptual errors. To help avoid committing these errors,
engage in perception checking, which means that we consider
a series of questions to confirm or challenge our perceptions
of others and their behaviors. For example, see if you can
provide two possible interpretations for the verbal and
nonverbal behavior observed and seek clarification of it in
order to determine the accuracy of your evaluation.
① 상대방에 대한 자신의 인식에 오류가 없는지 점검하라.
② 정신적 스트레스가 심할 때는 타인과의 만남을 피하라.
③ 처음 만나는 사람에게 좋은 인상을 주도록 노력하라.
④ 상대방의 심리를 파악하고 자신의 감정을 표현하라.
⑤ 언어적 행동과 비언어적 행동을 일치시켜라.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we see a happy face (or an angry one), it subtly
generates the corresponding emotion in us. To the degree we
take on the pace, posture, and facial expression of another
person, we start to inhabit their emotional space; as our body
mimics the other’s, we begin to experience emotional
matching. Our nervous system is automatically set to engage
in this emotional empathy. But how well we use this capacity
is largely a learned ability. Animals－and people－who have
been raised in extreme social isolation are poor at reading
emotional cues in those around them not because they lack the
basic circuitry for empathy but because, lacking emotional
tutors, they have never learned to pay attention to these
messages and so haven’t practiced this skill.
① 긍정적인 감정은 더 많은 공감을 불러일으킨다.
② 사람과 동물은 모방하는 능력에서 차이를 보인다.
③ 타인과 공감하는 능력을 잘 사용하려면 학습이 필요하다.
④ 얼굴 표정은 상대방의 감정을 파악하는 중요한 단서이다.
⑤ 인간이 타인과 공감하는 정도는 신경계에 의해 결정된다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we hear a story, we look for beliefs that are being
commented upon. Any story has many possible beliefs
inherent in it. But how does someone listening to a story find
those beliefs? We find them by looking through the beliefs we
already have. We are not as concerned with what we are
hearing as we are with finding what we already know that is
relevant. Picture it in this way. As understanders, we have a
list of beliefs, indexed by subject area. When a new story
appears, we attempt to find a belief of ours that relates to it.
When we do, we find a story attached to that belief and
compare the story in our memory to the one we are
processing. Our understanding of the new story becomes, at
that point, a function of the old story. Once we find a belief
and connected story, we need no further processing; that is,
the search for other beliefs stops.
① the use of a new story in understanding an old story
② the limits of our memory capacity in recalling stories
③ the influence of new stories on challenging our beliefs
④ the most efficient strategy to improve storytelling skills
⑤ the role of our existing beliefs in comprehending a new story
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Savannas pose a bit of a problem for ecologists. There is an
axiom in ecology that ‘complete competitors cannot coexist’:
in other words, where two populations of organisms use
exactly the same resources, one would be expected to do so
slightly more efficiently than the other and therefore come to
dominate in the long term. In temperate parts of the world,
either trees dominate (in forests) or grasses dominate (in
grasslands). Yet, in savannas grasses and trees coexist. The
classic explanation proposes that trees have deep roots while
grasses have shallow roots. The two plant types are therefore
able to coexist because they are not in fact competitors: the
trees increase in wetter climates and on sandier soils because
more water is able to penetrate to the deep roots. Trees do
indeed have a few small roots which penetrate to great depth,
but most of their roots are in the top half-metre of the soil, just
where the grass roots are.
* axiom: 원리, 공리
① A War at Hand Between Plants in Savannas
② A Rivalry for Wetter Soils among Savanna Trees
③ Are Savannas a Hidden Treasure of Bio-Diversity?
④ Cyclic Dominance of Trees over Grasses in Savannas
⑤ Strange Companions: Savanna Plants Confuse Ecologists
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the Western Hemisphere oil
production per day in 2010 and proven oil reserves as of 2011
for selected countries. ① The United States recorded 9.65
million barrels of daily oil production in 2010, the greatest
daily oil production among the countries shown on the graph.
② Canada had the second largest daily oil production followed
by Mexico and Brazil, with Venezuela recording the lowest
among the five countries in 2010. ③ As for proven oil reserves,
however, Venezuela recorded the largest amount among these
countries in 2011, possessing 211.2 billion barrels, followed by
Canada with 175.2 billion barrels. ④ In 2011, the sum of the
proven oil reserves of the United States, Mexico, and Brazil
was greater than those of Venezuela. ⑤ Brazil had larger
proven oil reserves than Mexico in 2011, but the daily oil
production of Brazil was lower than that of Mexico in 2010.
* proven oil reserves: 확인된 석유 매장량
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. Sequoyah에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Sequoyah, a Cherokee Indian, was born in about 1770 in
Taskigi, now in Tennessee. Raised by his Cherokee mother,
the young Sequoyah never learned to read or write English.
While interacting with English speakers, he realized the
necessity of a writing system for the Cherokee people. In
about 1809, Sequoyah began developing a system of writing,
adapting letters from English, Greek, and Hebrew. By 1821,
he had created a system of 86 symbols, representing all the
syllables of the Cherokee language. The Cherokee people
began to use the system in their schools and publish books
and newspapers in their language. In 1824, the General
Council of the Eastern Cherokees awarded Sequoyah a medal
in honor of his accomplishment. Sequoyah moved to
Oklahoma some years later and died in what is now Texas in
1843. And later, people remembered him by naming a certain
tree species “Sequoia.”
* syllable: 음절
① 1770년경 Taskigi에서 태어났다.
② 어린 시절에 영어를 읽고 쓰는 법을 배웠다.
③ Cherokee 사람들을 위한 문자 체계의 필요성을 깨달았다.
④ 업적을 인정받아 1824년에 메달을 받았다.
⑤ 1843년에 지금의 Texas에서 세상을 떠났다.
26. Kingston Badminton Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 일주일에 3일씩 4주 동안 운영된다.
② 오후 6시에는 15세 이상을 대상으로 진행된다.
③ 개인용 사물함을 이용하려면 추가 비용이 든다.
④ 등록 마감일은 6월 10일이다.
⑤ 배드민턴 라켓과 셔틀콕을 제공한다.
27. 16th Springvale Book Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
① 6월 4일부터 5일간 개최된다.
② 작가들의 강연이 오전에 예정되어 있다.
③ 행사장에서 구매한 책에 한정하여 작가들이 사인을 해 준다.
④ 웹 사이트에서 행사 정보 앱(app)을 내려 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 일부 프로그램의 경우 입장료를 지불해야 한다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
If an animal is innately programmed for some type of
behaviour, then there ① are likely to be biological clues. It is
no accident that fish have bodies which are streamlined and
② smooth, with fins and a powerful tail. Their bodies are
structurally adapted for moving fast through the water.
Similarly, if you found a dead bird or mosquito, you could
guess by looking at ③ its wings that flying was its normal
mode of transport. However, we must not be over-optimistic.
Biological clues are not essential. The extent to which they are
④ finding varies from animal to animal and from activity to
activity. For example, it is impossible to guess from their
bodies that birds make nests, and, sometimes, animals behave
in a way quite contrary to ⑤ what might be expected from
their physical form: ghost spiders have tremendously long
legs, yet they weave webs out of very short threads. To a
human observer, their legs seem a great hindrance as they spin
and move about the web.
Kingston Badminton Program
Are you looking for a simple and effective sports
program? Then check out the Kingston Badminton
Program and choose one of our courses taught by the
most experienced badminton coaches.
∙Course sessions will be held three days a week
(Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays) for 4 weeks
from June 20 to July 15.
3:00 p.m.－4:00 p.m.: Ages 7－10
4:30 p.m.－5:30 p.m.: Ages 11－14
6:00 p.m.－7:00 p.m.: Ages 15 and up
∙The tuition fee is $50 per person with a free personal
locker.
∙The deadline for registration is June 10.
∙Badminton rackets and shuttlecocks are provided.
For further information, call the Kingston Community
Center at 322－480－5267.
16th Springvale Book Festival
Saturday, June 4, 10 a.m.－5 p.m.
Springvale Public Library
(4536 Main Street, Springvale, WI)
Mark your calendar for the 16th Springvale Book
Festival. This is your big chance to meet the nation’s
BEST authors and discuss their works.
Authors will be speaking at the main hall on the 2nd
floor from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.
Note: Authors will be signing books in the lobby, so
please bring your own personal copies or you can
purchase books on site.
Get the most out of your big day by downloading the
festival app at our website (www.spvbf.org). It features
a complete list of all events & locations, maps, and ways
to share it all via social media.
All programs will be FREE of charge!
Please visit our website for more information about
the festival.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
In 2001, researchers at Wayne State University asked a
group of college volunteers to exercise for twenty minutes at a
(A) preset / self-selected pace on each of three machines: a
treadmill, a stationary bike, and a stair climber. Measurements
of heart rate, oxygen consumption, and perceived effort were
taken throughout all three workouts. The researchers expected
to find that the subjects unconsciously targeted the same
relative physiological intensity in each activity. Perhaps they
would (B) automatically / intentionally exercise at 65 percent
of their maximum heart rate regardless of which machine they
were using. Or maybe they would instinctively settle into
rhythm at 70 percent of their maximum rate of oxygen
consumption in all three workouts. But that’s not what
happened. There was, in fact, no (C) consistency / variation
in measurements of heart rate and oxygen consumption across
the three disciplines. Instead, the subjects were found to have
chosen the same level of perceived effort on the treadmill, the
bike, and the stair climber.
* treadmill: 러닝머신
** physiological: 생리학적인
(A) (B) (C)
① preset …… intentionally …… consistency
② preset …… automatically …… variation
③ self-selected …… intentionally …… variation
④ self-selected …… intentionally …… consistency
⑤ self-selected …… automatically …… consistency
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
In the summer of 1972, the actor Anthony Hopkins was
signed to play a leading role in a film based on George
Feifer’s novel The Girl from Petrovka. That is why ① he
traveled to London to buy a copy of the book. Unfortunately,
none of the main London bookstores had a copy. Then, on his
way home, waiting for an underground train at Leicester
Square tube station, he saw a discarded book lying on the seat
next to ② him. It was a copy of The Girl from Petrovka. As if
that was not coincidence enough, more was to follow. Later,
when ③ he had a chance to meet the author, Hopkins told him
about this strange occurrence. Feifer was interested. He said to
④ him that in November 1971 he had lent a friend a copy of
the book—a unique copy in which he had made notes on
turning the British English into American English for the
publication of an American version—but his friend had lost
the copy in London. A quick check of the copy Hopkins had
found showed that it was the very same copy that ⑤ his friend
had mislaid.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Once a hand or gripper has been directed to an object by
reaching, it can be grasped. Grasping requires that fingers hold
an object securely. A secure grip is one in which the object
won’t slip or move, especially when displaced by an external
force. Your grasp on a hammer, for example, would not be
secure if knocking against something caused you to drop it.
One precondition of a firm grasp is that the forces applied by
the fingers balance each other so as not to disturb the object’s
position. The characteristics of an object such as its geometric
configuration and mass distribution may demand that some
fingers apply greater force than others to maintain .
The grasp and support forces must also match overall object
mass and fragility. An egg requires a more delicate touch than
a rock. [3점]
* geometric configuration: 기하학적 형태
** fragility: 부서지기 쉬움
① distance ② efficiency
③ mobility ④ direction
⑤ stability
32. What story could be harsher than that of the Great Auk, the
large black-and-white seabird that in northern oceans took the
ecological place of a penguin? Its tale rises and falls like a
Greek tragedy, with island populations savagely destroyed by
humans until almost all were gone. Then the very last colony
found safety on a special island, one protected from the
destruction of humankind by vicious and unpredictable ocean
currents. These waters presented no problem to perfectly
adapted seagoing birds, but they prevented humans from
making any kind of safe landing. After enjoying a few years
of comparative safety, disaster of a different kind struck the
Great Auk. Volcanic activity caused the island refuge to sink
completely beneath the waves, and surviving individuals were
forced to find shelter elsewhere. The new island home they
chose in one
terrible way. Humans could access it with comparative ease,
and they did! Within just a few years the last of this
once-plentiful species was entirely eliminated. [3점]
* savagely: 잔혹하게
① lacked the benefits of the old
② denied other colonies easy access
③ faced unexpected natural disasters
④ caused conflicts among the refugees
⑤ had a similar disadvantage to the last island
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. It is not hard to see that a strong economy, where
opportunities are plentiful and jobs go begging,
. Biased employers
may still dislike hiring members of one group or another, but
when nobody else is available, discrimination most often
gives way to the basic need to get the work done. The same
goes for employees with prejudices about whom they do and
do not like working alongside. In the American construction
boom of the late 1990s, for example, even the carpenters’
union—long known as a “traditional bastion of white men, a
world where a coveted union card was handed down from
father to son”—began openly encouraging women, blacks,
and Hispanics to join its internship program. At least in the
workplace, jobs chasing people obviously does more to
promote a fluid society than people chasing jobs. [3점]
* bastion: 요새
** coveted: 부러움을 사는
① allows employees to earn more income
② helps break down social barriers
③ simplifies the hiring process
④ increases wage discrimination
⑤ improves the productivity of a company
34. One remarkable aspect of aboriginal culture is the concept
of “totemism,” where the tribal member at birth assumes the
soul and identity of a part of nature. This view of the earth and
its riches as an intrinsic part of oneself clearly rules out
mistreatment of the environment because this would only
constitute a destruction of self. Totems are more than objects.
They include spiritual rituals, oral histories, and the
organization of ceremonial lodges where records of the past
travel routes of the soul can be exchanged with others and
converted to mythology. The primary motivation is the
preservation of tribal myths and a consolidation and sharing of
every individual’s origins in nature. The aborigines see
,
through a hierarchy of totems that connect to their ancestral
origins, a cosmology that places them at one with the earth, and
behavior patterns that respect ecological balance. [3점]
* aboriginal: 원주민의
** consolidation: 병합, 강화
① themselves as incompatible with nature and her riches
② their mythology as a primary motive toward individualism
③ their identity as being self-contained from surrounding nature
④ their relationship to the environment as a single harmonious
continuum
⑤ their communal rituals as a gateway to distancing themselves
from their origins
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Roles are like a fence. They allow us a certain amount of
freedom, but for most of us that freedom doesn’t go very far.
Suppose that a woman decides that she is not going to wear
dresses—or a man that he will not wear suits and ties—
regardless of what anyone says. ① In most situations, they’ll
stick to their decision. ② When a formal occasion comes
along, however, such as a family wedding or a funeral, they
are likely to cave in to norms that they find overwhelming.
③ The increasing social pressure discourages us from
fulfilling the social norms and committing ourselves to shared
social conventions of behaviour. ④ Almost all of us follow
the guidelines for what is “appropriate” for our roles. ⑤ Few
of us are bothered by such restrictions, for our socialization is
so thorough that we usually want to do what our roles indicate
is appropriate.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
The ancient Greeks sought to improve memory through
brain training methods such as memory palaces and the
method of loci. At the same time, they and the Egyptians
became experts at externalizing information, inventing the
modern library, a grand storehouse for externalized
knowledge.
(A) This need isn’t simply learned; it is a biological imperative—
animals organize their environments instinctively. Most
mammals are biologically programmed to put their
digestive waste away from where they eat and sleep.
(B) We don’t know why these simultaneous explosions of
intellectual activity occurred when they did (perhaps daily
human experience had hit a certain level of complexity).
But the human need to organize our lives, our
environment, even our thoughts, remains strong.
(C) Dogs have been known to collect their toys and put them
in baskets; ants carry off dead members of the colony to
burial grounds; certain birds and rodents create barriers
around their nests in order to more easily detect invaders.
* method of loci: 장소를 활용한 기억법
** rodent: 설치류 동물
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
Imitation seems to be a key to the transmission of
valuable practices among nonhumans. The most famous
example is that of the macaque monkeys on the island of
Koshima in Japan.
(A) In the early 1950s, Imo, a one-year-old female macaque,
somehow hit upon the idea of washing her sweet potatoes
in a stream before eating them. Soon it was hard to find a
Koshima macaque who wasn’t careful to wash off her
sweet potato before eating it.
(B) Imo, though, realized that if you threw a handful of wheat
and sand into the ocean, the sand would sink and the
wheat would float. Again, within a few years most of her
fellow macaques were throwing wheat and sand into the
sea and obtaining the benefits.
(C) A few years later, Imo introduced another innovation.
Researchers on the island occasionally gave the monkeys
wheat (in addition to sweet potatoes). But the wheat was
given to them on the beach, where it quickly became
mixed with sand.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
That is why people experience jet lag when traveling
across time zones.
In humans, body clocks are responsible for daily changes in
blood pressure, body temperature, hormones, hunger, and
thirst, as well as our sleep-wake cycles. ( ① ) These biological
rhythms, which we experience as internal time, are probably
older than sleep, developed over the course of millions of years
of evolution. ( ② ) They facilitate physiological and
behavioral changes on a roughly twenty-four-hour cycle no
matter what is happening outside, whether a cold front moves
in or clouds block the light of the sun. ( ③ ) Their internal
clocks continue to run in accordance with the place they left
behind, not the one to which they have come, and it can take
some time to realign the two. ( ④ ) The most remarkable thing
is that our internal body clocks can be readjusted by
environmental cues. ( ⑤ ) We may get jet lag for a few days
when we ask our body clocks to adapt to a vastly different
schedule of day and night cycles on the other side of the Earth,
but they can do it. [3점]
* facilitate: 쉽게 하다
** realign: 재조정하다
39.
For example, the first step in servicing or installing
equipment is talking with the clients to understand how
they used the equipment.
The customer service representatives in an electronics firm
under major restructuring were told they had to begin selling
service contracts for their equipment in addition to installing
and repairing them. This generated a great deal of resistance.
( ① ) To the service representatives, learning to sell was a
very different game from what they had been playing. ( ② )
But it turned out they already knew a lot more about sales
than they thought. ( ③ ) The same is true in selling. ( ④ )
The salesperson first has to learn about the customer’s needs.
( ⑤ ) The service representatives also had a great deal of
product knowledge and hands-on experience, which is
obviously important in sales.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Lawyers and scientists use argument to mean a summary
of evidence and principles leading to a conclusion;
however, a scientific argument is different from a legal
argument. A prosecuting attorney constructs an argument
to persuade the judge or a jury that the accused is guilty; a
defense attorney in the same trial constructs an argument
to persuade the same judge or jury toward the opposite
conclusion. Neither prosecutor nor defender is obliged to
consider anything that weakens their respective cases. On
the contrary, scientists construct arguments because they
want to test their own ideas and give an accurate
explanation of some aspect of nature. Scientists can
include any evidence or hypothesis that supports their
claim, but they must observe one fundamental rule of
professional science. They must include all of the known
evidence and all of the hypotheses previously proposed.
Unlike lawyers, scientists must explicitly account for the
possibility that they might be wrong.
󰀻
Unlike lawyers, who utilize information (A) to
support their arguments, scientists must include all
information even if some of it is unlikely to (B)
their arguments.
(A) (B)
① objectively …… weaken
② objectively …… support
③ accurately …… clarify
④ selectively …… strengthen
⑤ selectively …… disprove
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The idea of protecting intellectual activity and creation has
deep roots. The ancient Greeks used an awards system to
(A) design achievements, which performed some of
the same functions as the modern patent system. Their
pottery, sculptures, and other manufactured goods had
symbols on them to note the tradesmen who created them,
which are the predecessors of modern trademarks. Similar
marks and symbols functioning as trademarks have been
found on Chinese pottery, possibly dating as far back as
2698 BCE, and in many other ancient societies, including the
Egyptians, the Assyrians, and the Vedic civilization.
The concept of intellectual property continued to develop
during the Roman period. The Roman Empire had an
incredible variety of trademarks. Roman potters alone used
approximately 6,000 trademarks. Additionally, Roman
authors had a sense that their intellectual creations were
(B) , as they complained about the exploitation of
those creations. Their sense of injustice was probably
heightened by the fact that there were laws and traditions in
place that supported their belief that only they could exploit
their creations. Roman authors could, in fact, make money
from the copying and publishing of their works because the
value of their intellectual creations was recognized.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Early Development of Intellectual Property Protection
② History of Roman Intellectual Property Law
③ How the Romans Protected Their Properties
④ Increasing Demand to Protect Ancient Artifacts
⑤ Why Trademarks Were Exploited in Early Civilizations
42. 윗글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
(A) (B)
① recognize …… valuable
② recognize …… outdated
③ honor …… ignorable
④ suspend …… imitable
⑤ suspend …… significant
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Richard was watching people on the street through the
window. Skirts were bouncing lightly and pants were
dancing delightedly in the seasonable weather as the spring
breeze chased them playfully. Some seemed excited, walking
like racing cars between passersby. He had ordered two
black coffees, one for himself and one for his friend, Julie.
She was running late, but the service was fast. The hot
coffees were promptly placed in front of (a) him.
(B)
Handing a spray can of cream over to Richard, the waiter
said, “Add it now if you want.” Richard couldn’t help asking
him why. (b) The blue-shirted man answered, “Actually,
hotter coffee loses energy faster than coffee cooled slightly
by the addition of cream.” “Really? Is that so?” The waiter
kindly smiled and said, “Yeah, I just learned it when I took a
class about coffee.” He also taught (c) his customer how to
make shapes with the cream. Richard paid close attention to
his explanation.
(C)
Looking at the coffees, Richard remembered that Julie
liked whipped cream on top of her hot coffee. He was
wondering if it was better to put the cream on now, or wait
till she arrived. “Since the cream is cold, it’ll cool down the
coffee faster,” he reasoned. Beep! It was a text message from
her. “I’ll be there in 5 minutes. Please put some cream on my
coffee.” He was startled, because she seemed to know
what he was thinking about. (d) Richard called over a
waiter wearing a blue shirt and asked him for whipped cream.
(D)
Richard thanked the waiter. Following his instructions,
Richard made a flower with the cream. He tried to be as
precise as he could. No sooner had he completed his
masterpiece, Julie stepped into the cafe. As she sat down, she
saw her coffee. “Wow, look at that! A white flower in the cup!
It looks so beautiful, Richard! It’s too lovely to drink,” his
friend said. “Try it,” (e) the happy man urged her. She tasted
it. “This coffee is absolutely delicious, too!” Talking and
laughing over coffee, they enjoyed the fabulous spring day.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Richard에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 어느 봄날 카페에서 길거리의 사람들을 바라보았다.
② 자신과 Julie를 위해 뜨거운 커피를 두 잔 주문했다.
③ 커피와 크림에 대해 웨이터와 대화를 나누었다.
④ 크림을 넣을지 알아보기 위해 Julie에게 문자를 보냈다.
⑤ Julie가 마실 커피 위에 꽃 모양을 만들었다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. Let’s do it this Friday.
② Sorry. I had to leave early yesterday.
③ No. The team meeting was canceled.
④ Thanks. We had a great time at the party.
⑤ Sure. We must hire him for our company.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Instead, you need to learn sign language.
② Actually, I didn’t read that news article.
③ Well, let’s plan a field trip with them.
④ Yeah, we had enough parking spaces.
⑤ Then, I’ll get him to sign your book.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 우체국 이전을 안내하려고
② 동호회 가입을 권유하려고
③ 여행 상품 정보를 제공하려고
④ 이사 업체 직원을 모집하려고
⑤ 동영상 제작 방법을 설명하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 대기 오염의 원인
② 기차 여행의 장점
③ 교통 체증의 심각성
④ 휴가 계획의 필요성
⑤ 안전 운전의 중요성
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 초청 강사 － 행사 진행자
② 호텔 투숙객 － 호텔 직원
③ 보험 가입 고객 － 보험 설계사
④ 봉사 활동 희망자 － 도서관 직원
⑤ 도서 박람회 관람객 － 신문 기자
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장소 정하기 ② 의자 나르기
③ 재료 구매하기 ④ 메뉴 결정하기
⑤ 전단 복사하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 Ben Tyler 콘서트에 갈 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 부모님과 저녁 식사를 해야 해서
② 가족 파티를 준비해야 해서
③ 팀 프로젝트를 끝내야 해서
④ 수업을 들으러 가야 해서
⑤ 동생을 돌봐야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $54 ② $63 ③ $70
④ $81 ⑤ $90
10. 대화를 듣고, Eugene Kim에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 출생지 ② 수상작 제목 ③ 집필한 책의 수
④ 집필 장소 ⑤ 나이
11. Science Quiz Olympics에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 매년 열리는 행사이다.
② 9월 23일 금요일에 개최된다.
③ 모든 참가자는 티셔츠를 받는다.
④ 참가하려면 신청서를 작성해야 한다.
⑤ 행사 당일에 참가 신청이 가능하다.
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 세발자전거를
고르시오.
Kids’ Tricycles for Sale
Model Frame Warranty Helmet
Included Price
① A Plastic 1 year × $65
② B Steel 1 year ○ $75
③ C Steel 2 years × $75
④ D Steel 3 years × $85
⑤ E Aluminum 3 years ○ $105
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Of course, it is. It’ll be good for your future career.
② Certainly. You’re scheduled to meet my assistant.
③ I don’t think so. You can’t use the center for free.
④ No way. You don’t want to work with children.
⑤ Yes. It’s necessary to quit my part-time job.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Sorry. I don’t have the same interests as you.
② Thank you. It’ll help me make new friends.
③ Absolutely. I’ll give you some advice.
④ No thanks. I don’t like to play sports.
⑤ Well done. It was a wonderful game.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jenny가 Daniel에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Jenny:
① Why don’t you move to the dormitory?
② You’d better find a quiet place to study.
③ You should major in computer engineering.
④ How about taking a summer course together?
⑤ You need to follow the rules in the dormitory.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① benefits of cooking at home
② lives of great chefs in history
③ tips for cooking with leftover food
④ children’s snacks made from grains
⑤ food products invented accidentally
17. 언급된 음식이 아닌 것은?
① corn flakes ② potato chips ③ ice cream cones
④ onion rings ⑤ chocolate chip cookies
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Organizer,
My name is Cathy Cameron. I’m writing in regards
to the “Boston Red Sox Baseball Trip” for the game
with the Yankees taking place on Saturday, September
3rd. Unfortunately, I have just become aware that your
company’s limit of 53 people for registration has already
been reached. However, I would really appreciate it if you
could allow my son to register additionally. He is a big fan
of the Red Sox, and this trip would make a great surprise gift
for his birthday. If there is any way that he is able to join the
trip, I would be very grateful. I’m sure it would give him the
perfect birthday. I look forward to hearing from you soon.
Yours sincerely,
Cathy Cameron
① 야구와 관련된 새로운 사업을 제안하려고
② 야구 경기 관람권 구매 대행을 요청하려고
③ 아들 생일 파티를 위한 장소 예약을 취소하려고
④ 주말 가족 여행 일정 변경이 가능한지 문의하려고
⑤ 야구 경기 관람 여행에 아들의 추가 등록을 부탁하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘Amy’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Amy was in the classroom staring out of the window
beside her. She thought how her gloomy face in the window
reflected her mistake. She tried not to think about her terrible
performance in class. Watching Amy look so discouraged,
Laurie, her best friend, decided she needed some cheering up.
So Laurie crossed her eyes and made a stupid face. Amy tried
not to look, but Laurie was making another funny face. This
time she couldn’t help turning back to see what her friend was
doing. It was her famous fish face: she was pushing her ears
out, crossing her eyes, and opening her mouth wide. Amy
laughed hard. She felt that she was lucky to have a friend that
could always cheer her up when she was feeling down.
① relaxed → frustrated ② satisfied → ashamed
③ bored → exhausted ④ excited → frightened
⑤ depressed → comforted
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
My barely-five-year-old son couldn’t go to bed one night until
he wrote “I love you Mom” on a piece of paper. Pajamas on, red
crayon in hand, he was very determined. A few mixed-up letters,
a couple of crumpled papers, and some help from Daddy later,
he handed me his heart on the page. Then, finally, he relaxed
enough to fall asleep. Sometimes, saying how you feel just isn’t
enough. Spoken words are invisible and untouchable. Write
it down, however, and you can see it, feel it, hold it, keep it
forever. Although we may think it, we can’t really give someone
our heart. But by writing, we can give someone our heart on a
page. A love note is a piece of paper that is a little piece of your
heart. Teach your child how to write love notes, and I promise
you will have many, many happy returns.
* crumpled: 구겨진
① 자녀의 활동에 동참하여 유대감을 강화하라.
② 자녀가 글을 통해 마음을 표현하도록 가르치라.
③ 자녀가 부모의 사랑을 느낄 수 있도록 행동하라.
④ 자녀에게 대화를 통해 자연스럽게 감정을 표현하라.
⑤ 자녀의 인지 능력 향상을 위해 글쓰기 교육을 하라.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One of the most demanding, and at the same time inspiring,
aspects of translating for children is the potential for such
creativity that arises from what Peter Hollindale has called the
‘childness’ of children’s texts: ‘the quality of being a child ―
dynamic, imaginative, experimental, interactive and unstable’.
The ‘unstable’ qualities of childhood that Hollindale cites
require a writer or translator to have an understanding of the
freshness of language to the child’s eye and ear, the child’s
affective concerns and the linguistic and dramatic play of
early childhood. Translating sound, for example, whether in
the read-aloud qualities of books for the younger child, in
animal noises, children’s poetry or in nonsense rhymes,
demands imaginative solutions ― as indeed does working with
visual material. Such multi-faceted creativity has, at times,
placed children’s literature at the forefront of imaginative
experimentation.
* multi-faceted: 다면의
① 아동문학 번역에서는 아동의 특성에 기반을 둔 창의성이 요구된다.
② 아동문학 속 다양한 의성어는 아동의 창의성 발달에 도움이 된다.
③ 아동문학 번역가는 아동의 태도를 긍정적으로 변화시키는 데 기여한다.
④ 아동문학가는 아동의 성장 과정을 구체적으로 표현할 수 있어야 한다.
⑤ 아동문학은 아동 언어 발달에 도움이 되는 다양한 요소들을 담고 있다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
From an evolutionary perspective, fear has contributed to
both fostering and limiting change, and to preserving the
species. We are programmed to be afraid. It is a survival need,
as is stability, which is another force of nature that can limit
the capacity to change. Stable patterns are necessary lest we
live in chaos; however, they make it difficult to abandon
entrenched behaviors, even those that are no longer useful,
constructive, or health creating. And fear can keep you from
changing when you don’t want to risk a step into unknown
territory; for example, some people choose not to leave an
unfulfilling job or a failing relationship because they fear the
unknown more than the known. On the other hand, fear can
also motivate change in order to avoid something you’re afraid
of, such as dying young ― as one of your parents might have.
* entrenched: 굳어버린
① fear’s negative roles in cases of chaos
② effective strategies for maintaining stability
③ fear and its dual functions in terms of change
④ the necessities of reducing a fear of the unknown
⑤ ways of confronting fear to overcome difficulties in life
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
A strategic vision has little value to the organization unless
it’s effectively communicated down the line to lower-level
managers and employees. It would be difficult for a vision
statement to provide direction to decision makers and energize
employees toward achieving long-term strategic intent unless
they know of the vision and observe management’s commitment
to that vision. Communicating the vision to organization
members nearly always means putting “where we are going and
why” in writing, distributing the statement organizationwide,
and having executives personally explain the vision and its
justification to as many people as possible. Ideally, executives
should present their vision for the company in a manner that
reaches out and grabs people’s attention. An engaging and
convincing strategic vision has enormous motivational value ―
for the same reason that a stone mason is inspired by building
a great cathedral for the ages.
* stone mason: 석공 ** cathedral: 대성당
① What Makes a Strategic Vision Successful?
② Why Is Creating a Vision Statement Difficult?
③ Building a Future: Innovative Leadership Training
④ Effective Decision-Making Processes in Organizations
⑤ Motivating Employees through Organizational Development
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentage of Americans in
different age groups who said it was “generally OK” to use a
cellphone in different settings in 2014. ① In the setting of “On
public transportation,” the younger groups are more accepting
than the older ones regarding cellphone use. ② “When walking
down the street” is the setting in which people aged 30-49 are
more permissive towards cellphone use than the other age
groups. ③ As for “At restaurants,” 50% of the 18-29 year olds
answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones while 26% of those
65 and older say the same. ④ Only 4% of people in each of the
two age groups, 30-49 and 50-64, agree that cellphone use is
acceptable in the setting of “At movie theaters or other quiet
places.” ⑤ In the same setting, less than 10% of people in each
age group answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. !Kung San에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The !Kung San, also known as the Bushmen, live in the
Kalahari Desert in southern Africa. The “!K” in the name
“!Kung” is like the sound that occurs when a cork is pulled
from a bottle. Traditionally, they lived by hunting and
gathering, the way of life that was the universal mode of
human existence until 10,000 years ago. The total population
of the !Kung San in 1986 was about 15,000, with most of
them living in nonhunting and gathering situations on
cattleposts or farms. The !Kung San in the Dobe area of
Botswana were divided into twenty five groups with a mean
size of eighteen to twenty people. The !Kung San in that area
had abundant food supply and a lot of leisure time. The main
food crop was the wild mongongo nut, millions of which were
harvested every year.
① 남부 아프리카 Kalahari 사막에 산다.
② 이름 속 “!K”는 병에서 코르크 마개를 뽑을 때 나는 소리와 유사하다.
③ 1986년에 전체 인구가 약 15,000명이었다.
④ Botswana의 Dobe 지역에서는 25개의 그룹으로 나뉘어 있었다.
⑤ Dobe 지역에서 식량은 부족했지만 여가 시간은 많았다.
26. 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 스포츠센터 개장일은 11월 30일이다.
② 응모작 제출은 웹사이트에서 진행된다.
③ 최상위 응모작 세 개가 온라인 투표 대상이 된다.
④ 투표는 두 달 동안 웹사이트에서 진행된다.
⑤ 우승 상품은 스포츠센터 1년 회원권이다.
27. Fashion Career Discovery Day에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
① 전문 디자이너들과의 인터뷰는 포함되어 있지 않다.
② 11월 5일부터 이틀간 진행된다.
③ 티켓 가격에 점심과 기념품이 포함된다.
④ 10명부터 단체 할인이 적용된다.
⑤ 예약하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
Like life in traditional society, but unlike other team sports,
baseball is not governed by the clock. A football game is
comprised of exactly sixty minutes of play, a basketball game
forty or forty-eight minutes, but baseball has no set length of time
within which the game must be completed. The pace of the game
is therefore leisurely and (A) unhurried / unhurriedly, like the
world before the discipline of measured time, deadlines,
schedules, and wages paid by the hour. Baseball belongs to the
kind of world (B) which / in which people did not say, “I haven’t
got all day.” Baseball games do have all day to be played. But that
does not mean that they can go on forever. Baseball, like
traditional life, proceeds according to the rhythm of nature,
specifically the rotation of the Earth. During its first half century,
games were not played at night, which meant that baseball games,
like the traditional work day, (C) ending / ended when the sun set.
(A) (B) (C)
① unhurried …… in which …… ended
② unhurried …… which …… ending
③ unhurriedly …… which …… ended
④ unhurriedly …… which …… ending
⑤ unhurriedly …… in which …… ended
Name Our Sports Center!
The grand opening of our brand-new sports
center is on November 30th, but we still don’t
have a name! Please take this opportunity to be part of
Watford Community history, and help us name it!
Entry Submission
∙September 1st—30th on our website (www.watfordcc.org)
The three best entries will be selected by the Watford
volunteer group and will be made available online for
voting to decide the winner.
Vote
∙October 15th—31st on our website
Winner Announcement
∙November 3rd on our website
∙Prize: a one-year sports center membership
We’re looking for the most dynamic and fun names,
so get your entries in now!
Watford Community Council
Fashion Career Discovery Day
Experience our Fashion Career Discovery Day and unlock
pathways to a fulfilling career in fashion! Your day will
include interviews with professional designers, as well as the
opportunity to watch a fashion show.
Date: Saturday, November 5, 2016
Time: 10 a.m.—4 p.m.
Location: Pavilion Fashion Plaza
716 East Livera Street
Ticket Price: $20 per person (lunch and souvenir included)
A minimum of 15 participants is necessary for group
bookings to receive a 10% discount.
Reservations are required and must be made on our website
(www.pfp2016.org) by 6 p.m., Thursday, November 3, 2016.
Please email us at fashioncdd@pfp2016.org for further
information.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
You can’t have a democracy if you can’t talk with your
neighbors about matters of mutual interest or concern. Thomas
Jefferson, who had an enduring interest in democracy, came
to a similar conclusion. He was prescient in understanding
the dangers of (A) concentrated / limited power, whether in
corporations or in political leaders or exclusionary political
institutions. Direct involvement of citizens was what had made
the American Revolution possible and given the new republic
vitality and hope for the future. Without that involvement, the
republic would die. Eventually, he saw a need for the nation to
be (B) blended / subdivided into “wards” ― political units so
small that everyone living there could participate directly in
the political process. The representatives for each ward in the
capital would have to be (C) resistant / responsive to citizens
organized in this way. A vibrant democracy conducted locally
would then provide the active basic unit for the democratic life
of the republic. With that kind of involvement, the republic might
survive and prosper.
* prescient: 선견지명이 있는 ** vibrant: 활력이 넘치는
(A) (B) (C)
① concentrated …… blended …… resistant
② concentrated …… subdivided …… responsive
③ concentrated …… subdivided …… resistant
④ limited …… subdivided …… resistant
⑤ limited …… blended …… responsive
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Harumi Tanaka, from Osaka, Japan, had accepted an
assignment in Boston. His task was to explore the possibility
of developing joint ventures with American firms. ① He had
been invited by one company to spend a month there and
had been assigned an office and a research assistant. Harumi
agreed on a Monday to present a business plan the following
Friday. On Tuesday, the computers in the company crashed,
and the research assistant called in sick with a severe case of
the flu. Still, Harumi pushed forward and presented ② his
plan on Friday. He began his presentation, “I’m sorry that
③ I am not well prepared. This meeting may not be a good
use of your time.” He then went into a clear, interesting
presentation. After the meeting, one of the American executives
said, “④ I don’t know why you had to apologize. Everyone
knows about the computer crash and your assistant’s illness.”
Harumi responded that he thought that the apology would be
a good introduction to ⑤ his presentation.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. A sleeping mother has the ability to identify the particular
cry of her own baby. This is one of the bonding factors that
has been forgotten because of the way in which we live today.
Typically, there is now only one newborn baby in any family
house or apartment, so there is no way to test this ability. In
an ancient tribe, however, living in small huts in a tiny village
settlement, a mother would have been able to hear any of the
babies crying in the night. If she woke up every time one of
them screamed for food, she might get no sleep at all. During
the course of evolution she became programmed to awake
only at the sound of her own particular baby. This
is still there to this day, even though it is seldom used. [3점]
① affection ② creativity ③ sociability
④ intolerance ⑤ sensitivity
32. When people try to control situations that are essentially
uncontrollable, they are inclined to experience high levels of
stress. Thus, suggesting that they need to take active control is
bad advice in those situations. What they need to do is to accept
that some things are beyond their control. Similarly, teaching
people to accept a situation that could readily be changed could
be bad advice; sometimes the only way to get what you want is
to take active control. Research has shown that when people who
feel helpless fail to take control, they experience negative
emotional states such as anxiety and depression. Like stress,
these negative emotions can damage the immune response. We
can see from this that health is not linearly related to control. For
optimum health, people should be encouraged to take control to
a point . [3점]
① but to yield to the situations within their control
② but to disregard immune response when stressed
③ but to recognize when further control is impossible
④ and to fight against uncontrollable situations persistently
⑤ and to try harder to conquer uncontrollable stressful situations
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. A good deal of the information stored in working memory is
encoded in an auditory form, especially when the information is
language based. For example, in an early study by Conrad, adults
were shown six-letter sequences, with letters being presented
visually, one at a time, at intervals of three-fourths of a second.
As soon as the last letter of a sequence had been presented,
participants in the study wrote down all six of the letters they had
seen, guessing at any letters they couldn’t easily recall. When
people recalled letters incorrectly, the letters they said they had
seen were more likely to resemble the actual stimuli in terms
of .
For example, the letter F was “remembered” as the auditorially
similar letter S 131 times but as the visually similar letter P only
14 times. Similarly, the letter V was remembered as B 56 times
but as X only 5 times. [3점]
① how the letters were visually represented
② how the letters sounded than how they looked
③ how the length of the letter sequence was recognized
④ how the letters were ordered than how they were pronounced
⑤ how often the letters appeared than how long they were shown
34. Even if it is correct to say that we express and represent
our thoughts in language, it may be a big mistake to suppose
that there are structural similarities between what is doing the
representing and what is represented. Robert Stalnaker, in his
book Inquiry, suggests an analogy with the representation of
numbers: The number 9 can be represented as ‘12—3’ but it
does not follow that 12, 3, or subtraction are constituents of
the number 9. We could compare a thought and its verbal
expression with toothpaste and its ‘expression’ from a tube.
That the result of expressing toothpaste is a long, thin,
cylinder does not entail that toothpaste itself is long, thin, or
cylindrical. Similarly, a thought might get expressed out loud
in a statement with a particular linguistic structure. It does not
follow that .
Suppose, for example, that I look at a fruit bowl, and think
that there is an apple and an orange in that bowl. The objects
in front of my eyes include some pieces of fruit and a bowl,
but no object corresponding to the word ‘and’ exists either in
the world or in my visual image. [3점]
* subtraction: 빼기 ** entail: 의미(함의)하다
① the thought itself has such a structure
② linguistic analysis of a thought is unlikely
③ the language in mind lacks a logical structure
④ a thought and its verbal expression are distinct
⑤ the sentence structurally differs from the thought
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
The pull effect of a destination can be positively influenced
by the introduction and reinforcement of pro-tourism policies
that make a destination more accessible. ① Governments, for
example, can and often do employ awareness campaigns
among the resident population to promote a welcoming attitude
towards visitors, in order to foster a positive market image.
② However, because such campaigns depend on widespread
social engineering, and because their effects can be
counteracted by random acts of violence, positive outcomes
cannot be guaranteed. ③ Most governments in developing
countries encourage international tourism because tourists
from wealthy countries usually spend more. ④ Furthermore,
it is the behaviour of some tourists, and the structure and
development of tourism itself, that often generate negative
attitudes within the host community. ⑤ This implies that major
structural changes to tourism itself, rather than awareness
campaigns, may be required to foster a welcoming attitude.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Psychologists Dember and Earl suggested that the
motivation for exploration had its roots in a curiosity drive.
(A) This is very important for understanding why people will
often return to explore things that they explored before or
do things they have done before. In our daily lives, for
example, we might decide to listen to a piece of music that
we have listened to many times.
(B) By returning to that music with a new or fresh perspective,
perhaps as a result of listening to other music, we find
something new and interesting. One reason that people can
play a card game such as bridge over and over is that no
matter how many times you have played the game, it will be
different in some way.
(C) They suggested that curiosity is stimulated by novelty and
argued that novelty is in the eye of the beholder. We
could have seen something many times before, but as the
result of having new skills or competence, we discover
new or different aspects of that object.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
The hunters, armed only with primitive weapons, were
no real match for an angry mammoth. Many were probably
killed or severely injured in the close encounters that were
necessary to slay one of these gigantic animals.
(A) Some of them may have traveled by small boat along the
coast, but many walked. Twenty thousand years ago, at the
height of the last glacial period, sea level was so low that
dry land joined what are now separate continents.
(B) But the rewards were great when one was brought down.
A single mammoth could feed, clothe, and supply a band
for a long time. The hunters had followed the mammoths
and other large animals eastward from Asia across what is
now the Bering Sea.
(C) Slowly, imperceptibly, and probably unconsciously, hunters
had moved across the land bridge and become the first
immigrants to the new land. Without the ice age, North
America might have remained unpopulated for thousands
of years more.
* slay: 죽이다
① (A) — (C) — (B) ② (B) — (A) — (C)
③ (B) — (C) — (A) ④ (C) — (A) — (B)
⑤ (C) — (B) — (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Even so, research confirms the finding that nonverbal cues
are more credible than verbal cues, especially when verbal
and nonverbal cues conflict.
Researchers have reported various nonverbal features of
sarcasm. ( ① ) Most disagree as to whether nonverbal cues
are essential to the perception of sarcasm or the emotion that
prompts it. ( ② ) Also, nonverbal cues are better indicators
of speaker intent. ( ③ ) As the nature of sarcasm implies a
contradiction between intent and message, nonverbal cues
may “leak” and reveal the speaker’s true mood as they do
in deception. ( ④ ) Ostensibly, sarcasm is the opposite of
deception in that a sarcastic speaker typically intends the
receiver to recognize the sarcastic intent; whereas, in deception
the speaker typically intends that the receiver not recognize
the deceptive intent. ( ⑤ ) Thus, when communicators are
attempting to determine if a speaker is sarcastic, they compare
the verbal and nonverbal message and if the two are in
opposition, communicators may conclude that the speaker is
being sarcastic.
* sarcasm: 비꼼 ** ostensibly: 표면상
39.
This dynamic can be illustrated with the example of
parents who place equal value on convenience and concern
for the environment.
Our total set of values and their relative importance to us
constitute our value system. ( ① ) The way that we behave in
a given situation is often influenced by how important one
value is to us relative to others. ( ② ) For instance, deciding
whether to spend Saturday afternoon relaxing with your family
or exercising will be determined by the relative importance
that you place on family versus health. ( ③ ) You feel value
conflict when you do something that is consistent with one
value but inconsistent with another equally important value.
( ④ ) They may experience value conflict if they buy
disposable diapers for their babies. ( ⑤ ) Consumers facing
such decisions consider not only the product’s immediate
consumption outcomes but also the product’s general effect
on society, including how the manufacturer behaves (e.g.,
toward the environment).
* diaper: 기저귀
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
In science one experiment, whether it succeeds or fails, is
logically followed by another in a theoretically infinite
progression. According to the underlying myth of modern
science, this progression is always replacing the smaller
knowledge of the past with the larger knowledge of the
present, which will be replaced by the yet larger knowledge
of the future. In the arts, by contrast, no limitless sequence of
works is ever implied or looked for. No work of art is
necessarily followed by a second work that is necessarily
better. Given the methodologies of science, the law of gravity
and the genome were bound to be discovered by somebody;
the identity of the discoverer is incidental to the fact. But it
appears that in the arts there are no second chances. We must
assume that we had one chance each for The Divine Comedy
and King Lear. If Dante and Shakespeare had died before
they wrote those works, nobody ever would have written them.
󰀻
While scientific knowledge is believed to progress through
(A) experiments, an artistic work tends to be
(B) to its creator with no limitless sequence implied.
(A) (B)
① successive …… unique
② successive …… valuable
③ controlled …… valuable
④ incidental …… influential
⑤ incidental …… unique
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Three composers attended a show at the Café Concert des
Ambassadeurs. There they heard performances of a song written
by one of them and a sketch written by the other two. After the
performance, the three refused to pay their bill, telling the owner
of the café: ‘You use the products of our labour without paying
us for it. So there’s no reason why we should pay for your
service’. The case went to court, and the composers won on
appeal. The decision extended an existing law on theatrical
performances to all musical works and all public performance
of those works. This decision created a new category of legal
right ― the performing right ― and with it a new economic
relationship between music user and copyright owner.
As a result of the decision, these composers and others
including music publishers founded a society to enforce and
administer their performing rights. In doing so, they
established the principle and practice of the collective
administration of rights, based on the fact that ― with the
possible exception of opera performances ― it was
impossible for a single composer or publisher to monitor
every use of his or her work by singers, bands, promoters or,
in the twentieth century, broadcasters. , the new
society was entrusted with the task of monitoring music use,
issuing licences to music users, negotiating fees, collecting
fees and finally distributing the money raised to the
composers and songwriters whose works were adding value
to other people’s businesses.
41. 윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the cultural significance of musical performance
② strategies for creating public interest through music
③ the rise of performing rights in music and its effects
④ performing arts for the public and their artistic value
⑤ the influence of the new society on increasing licence fees
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Accordingly ② Nevertheless ③ Otherwise
④ Conversely ⑤ Similarly
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
What interested me the most about the new house was the
stable in the backyard, in which my father let me make a
small space for a pony. I believed that it meant that I would
get a pony for Christmas. (a) He also said, “Lennie, someday
you’ll have a pony of your own.” However, “some day” is a
pain to a boy who lives in and knows only “now.”
Meanwhile my father took me to a pony fair and let me try
some ponies, but (b) he always found some fault with them,
leaving me in despair. When Christmas was at hand, I had
abandoned all hope of getting one. Instead, I hung up the
biggest stocking I had. Waking up at 7 a.m., my little sisters
and I raced for the fireplace downstairs. While my sisters
were delighted to find their stockings filled with presents,
mine was empty. I went out into the yard and wept all by
myself.
After an hour, my frustration reached its climax, when I saw
a man riding a pony with a brand-new saddle. When he looked
at our door, he just passed by, which caused me to break into a
flood of tears. Then, he said, “Kid, do you know a boy named
Lennie Steffens?” “That’s me,” I replied in tears. He said,
“I’ve been looking all over for your house. Why don’t you put
your house number where it can be seen?” He went on saying,
“I should have been here at 7. Your father told me to bring the
pony here and leave (c) him for you.”
I’d never seen anything so beautiful as my pony. And finally,
I rode off into the fields. Thrilled by riding, I began to feast my
eyes on the world around me. The trees seemed to be taking on
smiling faces and the birds seemed to be singing to congratulate
me on getting my new friend. When I returned home, my father
asked, “Why did you come back so soon?” With a smile on my
face, I answered (d) him, “I didn’t want to make him feel tired.
It’s his first day with me.” (e) He laughed and wiped away the
tear stains from my face ― his heartfelt gesture of apology for
such a long-delayed present. Bursting with happiness, I spent
the rest of the day brushing my pony in the stable.
* stable: 마구간
43. 윗글의 마지막 단락에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
① witty and humorous ② joyful and heartwarming
③ gloomy and hopeless ④ mysterious and adventurous
⑤ desperate and discouraging
44. 밑줄 친 (a) ～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 아버지는 Lennie에게 조랑말을 위한 공간을 마련하도록 하였다.
② 아버지는 Lennie를 조랑말 시장에 데리고 갔다.
③ Lennie의 여동생들은 크리스마스 선물을 받지 못했다.
④ Lennie는 조랑말을 예정보다 늦게 받았다.
⑤ Lennie는 마구간에서 조랑말을 솔질해 주었다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1
8
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes. That would be great.
② Sure. We had a great time.
③ Right. I already got a job.
④ Never. They haven’t seen it.
⑤ No. There’s no writing class.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I agree. But I don’t have the time for it.
② You’re right. Then I’ll never tell anyone.
③ Trust me. You’ll realize you did the right thing.
④ I understand. But let us know if it happens again.
⑤ That’s true. We’ve been practicing for a long time.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 농장 체험 프로그램을 홍보하려고
② 유산소 운동의 장점을 소개하려고
③ 가족 여행 준비물을 안내하려고
④ 유제품 보관 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 저지방 식단의 중요성을 강조하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 효과적인 독서를 위해서 집중력을 길러야 한다.
② 학습자의 수준에 맞는 영어 도서를 선택해야 한다.
③ 도전 욕구를 불러일으키는 과제는 학습 동기를 높인다.
④ 학습자의 흥미를 고려한 영어 읽기 자료를 개발해야 한다.
⑤ 사전을 활용한 어휘 학습은 영어 읽기 능력 향상에 도움이 된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 사회자 － 마술사 ② 조련사 － 관람객
③ 무대감독 － 가수 ④ 운전기사 － 정비사
⑤ 은행원 － 고객
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 공연 연습 도와주기
② 생일 케이크 만들기
③ 카메라 가방 구매하기
④ 여분의 메모리 카드 찾기
⑤ 아이의 무대의상 가져오기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 하이킹을 할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 휴대전화를 수리해야 해서
② 할머니를 찾아뵈어야 해서
③ 회사 회의에 참석해야 해서
④ 신상품 광고를 준비해야 해서
⑤ 친구들과 영화를 보러 가야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36 ② $40 ③ $45 ④ $47 ⑤ $50
10. 대화를 듣고, World Furniture Expo에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 개최 기간 ② 개최 장소 ③ 참여 업체 수
④ 특별 강좌 ⑤ 입장료
11. Creative Minds Science Club에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 1학년과 2학년 학생이 가입할 수 있다.
② 매주 화요일 방과 후에 모인다.
③ 작년에 다수의 발명 대회에서 수상하였다.
④ 올해의 지도 교사는 물리 선생님이다.
⑤ 더 많은 정보를 학교 게시판에서 찾을 수 있다.
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지 1
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 램프를 고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Probably not. You’d better see a doctor.
② It’s my fault. I should’ve told you earlier.
③ That’s too bad. We waited for you today.
④ No problem. I can explain how to get there.
⑤ That’s right. We met in the library yesterday.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① That’s a good idea. I’ll get rid of it right away.
② I think it’s closed. Turn in the book tomorrow.
③ I hope you’re right. I’ll check with them.
④ It’s too late. The tickets are all sold out.
⑤ Here’s the wallet. Take it to the station.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Brian이 Sarah에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Brian:
① You can take a singing class at the local community center.
② Try to keep a close relationship with your classmates.
③ Would you give me some advice as a mentor?
④ You need to get help with your recommendation letter.
⑤ How about volunteering as a mentor at the community center?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① several ways flowers attract animals
② popular professions related to animals
③ various animals that feed from flowers
④ major factors that pose a threat to animals
⑤ endangered animals living on tropical islands
17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① hummingbirds ② bats ③ lizards
④ parrots ⑤ squirrels
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 한국의 대학 생활과 관련한 유의 사항을 알리려고
② 한국어 글쓰기 강좌의 변경된 등록 절차를 공지하려고
③ 한국어 글쓰기 지도를 받을 외국인 학생을 모집하려고
④ 외국인 학생을 위한 글쓰기 센터 설립을 건의하려고
⑤ 한국어 글쓰기 지도 강사의 자격 요건을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Breaden의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
All smiling, Breaden, a cute three-year-old boy, was walking
along the aisle of snacks, bars, and sweets. It was the aisle of
all kinds of temptation for him. “Wow!” he exclaimed. Right in
front of his eyes were rows of delicious-looking chocolate bars
waiting to be touched. His mom was holding his hand.
Breaden, her only child, had always been the focus of her
attention and she was cautious not to lose him in the market.
Suddenly, she stopped to say hello to her friends. Breaden
stopped, too. With his eyes wide open and his mouth watering,
Breaden stretched out his arm and was about to grab a bar
when he felt a tight grip on his hand. He looked up. “Breaden,
not today!” He knew what that meant. “Okay, Mommy,” he
sighed. His shoulders fell.
① excited → disappointed ② embarrassed → satisfied
③ lonely → pleased ④ annoyed → relieved
⑤ delighted → jealous
20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many present efforts to guard and maintain human
progress, to meet human needs, and to realize human
ambitions are simply unsustainable ─ in both the rich and
poor nations. They draw too heavily, too quickly, on already
overdrawn environmental resource accounts to be affordable
far into the future without bankrupting those accounts. They
may show profit on the balance sheets of our generation, but
our children will inherit the losses. We borrow environmental
capital from future generations with no intention or prospect
of repaying. They may blame us for our wasteful ways, but
they can never collect on our debt to them. We act as we do
because we can get away with it: future generations do not
vote; they have no political or financial power; they cannot
challenge our decisions.
① 환경 문제를 해결하기 위한 세대 간 협력이 중요하다.
② 인류의 발전은 다양한 환경 자원의 개발에 달려 있다.
③ 미래의 환경 문제에 대비한 국제 사회의 공조가 필요하다.
④ 선진국들은 경제력을 기반으로 환경 자원을 선점하고 있다.
⑤ 현세대는 미래 세대에 대한 고려 없이 환경 자원을 남용하고 있다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Want to improve your Korean writing? Writing is an
essential tool that will help you adjust to Korean
university life. The Ha-Rang Writing Center offers a
free tutoring program open to all international students
at our university. We encourage you to take advantage
of this. The program has always been very popular
among international students. Registration opens from
November 28 for three days only. Once you are
registered, we will match you with a perfect tutor and
contact you to arrange your schedule. We are sure that
you will be satisfied with our well-experienced tutors.
Don’t miss this great opportunity to improve your
Korean writing. For more information, feel free to email
Jiyung Yoon, HRWC Director, at jyoon@hrwc.org.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
The precision of the lines on the map, the consistency with
which symbols are used, the grid and/or projection system, the
apparent certainty with which place names are written and
placed, and the legend and scale information all give the map
an aura of scientific accuracy and objectivity. Although
subjective interpretation goes into the construction of these
cartographic elements, the finished map appears to express an
authoritative truth about the world, separate from any interests
and influences. The very trust that this apparent objectivity
inspires is what makes maps such powerful carriers of ideology.
However unnoticeably, maps do indeed reflect the world views
of either their makers or, more probably, the supporters of their
makers, in addition to the political and social conditions under
which they were made. Some of the simple ideological
messages that maps can convey include: This land is and has
long been ours; here is the center of the universe; if we do not
claim this land, the enemies you most fear will.
* aura: 기운, 분위기 ** cartographic : 지도 제작(법)의
① the authority derived from trustworthy maps
② political and social conflicts caused by maps
③ ideologies lying beneath the objectivity of maps
④ the conditions essential to making a map accurate
⑤ subjectivity defining the creativity of map-making
[22～23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. As a system for transmitting specific factual information
without any distortion or ambiguity, the sign system of
honey-bees would probably win easily over human language
every time. However, language offers something more
valuable than mere information exchange. Because the
meanings of words are not invariable and because
understanding always involves interpretation, the act of
communicating is always a joint, creative effort. Words can
carry meanings beyond those consciously intended by
speakers or writers because listeners or readers bring their own
perspectives to the language they encounter. Ideas expressed
imprecisely may be more intellectually stimulating for
listeners or readers than simple facts. The fact that language is
not always reliable for causing precise meanings to be generated
in someone else’s mind is a reflection of its powerful strength
as a medium for creating new understanding. It is the inherent
ambiguity and adaptability of language as a meaning-making
system that makes the relationship between language and
thinking so special.
* distortion: 왜곡, 곡해
① Erase Ambiguity in Language Production!
② Not Creative but Simple: The Way Language Works
③ Communication as a Universal Goal in Language Use
④ What in Language Creates Varied Understanding?
⑤ Language: A Crystal-Clear Looking Glass
23. The film director, as compared to the theater director, has
as his material, the finished, recorded celluloid. This material
from which his final work is composed consists not of living
men or real landscapes, not of real, actual stage-sets, but only
of their images, recorded on separate strips that can be
shortened, altered, and assembled according to his will. The
elements of reality are fixed on these pieces; by combining
them in his selected sequence, shortening and lengthening
them according to his desire, the director builds up his own
“filmic” time and “filmic” space. He does not adapt reality,
but uses it for the creation of a new reality, and the most
characteristic and important aspect of this process is that, in it,
laws of space and time invariable and inescapable in work
with actuality become obedient. The film assembles from
them a new reality proper only to itself.
① A Reality in the Film Director’s Hands
② The Director’s Reality Never Changes
③ Innovative Technology in Film Editing
④ A Filmic World: Lost in Time and Space
⑤ Film Making: Exploration into the Unknown
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The two pie charts above show how much of the
information found using search engines is considered to be
accurate or trustworthy by two groups of respondents (AP &
NWP teachers and U.S. adult search users) in 2012. ① As for
AP & NWP teachers, five percent say that “All / Almost all”
of the information found using search engines is accurate or
trustworthy, while 28 percent of U.S. adult search users say
the same. ② The largest percentage of both AP & NWP
teachers and U.S. adult search users answer that “Most” of
the information is accurate or trustworthy. ③ In addition, 40
percent of AP & NWP teachers say that “Some” of the
information is accurate or trustworthy, and more than 30
percent of U.S. adult search users respond the same. ④ U.S.
adult search users saying that “Very little / None” of the
information found using search engines is accurate or
trustworthy account for less than five percent. ⑤ The
percentage of U.S. adult search users who answer “Don’t
know” is only one percent.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4
8
25. Miloš Forman에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Even though he won many Academy Awards, Miloš
Forman was not a U.S. born filmmaker. Forman grew up in a
small town near Prague. Orphaned when his parents died
during World War II, he was raised by his relatives. In the
1950s, Forman studied film at the film school of the
University of Prague. Throughout the late 1950s and early
1960s, Forman acted as either writer or assistant director on
several films. Later, he emigrated to the U.S. and continued to
make films. In 1975, he directed One Flew over the Cuckoo’s
Nest, which became only the second film in history to win
Oscars in all the five major categories. Afterward, the movie
Amadeus, a celebration of the genius of Mozart, which he
also directed, swept eight Oscars including one for best
director. With Jan Novák, Forman wrote his autobiography,
Turnaround: A Memoir, which was published in 1994.
① Prague 근교의 작은 마을에서 성장했다.
② Prague 대학교에서 영화를 공부했다.
③ 미국으로 이주한 후에도 계속 영화를 만들었다.
④ 영화 Amadeus로 오스카 최고 감독상을 수상했다.
⑤ Turnaround: A Memoir를 단독으로 집필했다.
26. Fremont Art College’s 7th Annual Art Exhibition에 관한
다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 개장 시간은 주중과 주말이 다르다.
② 학생들이 출품한 사진이 전시될 예정이다.
③ 모든 전시품은 판매되지 않는다.
④ 전시회장 내에서 사진 촬영이 허용된다.
⑤ 카페테리아에서 간식이 무료로 제공될 것이다.
27. Fall Festival at Forest Botanic Gardens에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 아침 산책은 비가 내려도 진행된다.
② 연날리기와 모래성 쌓기는 무료이다.
③ 잔디밭에 앉는 것이 허용된다.
④ 헤드폰 없이 오디오 장치를 사용할 수 있다.
⑤ 주차 요금은 무료이다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
When people face real adversity ─ disease, unemployment,
or the disabilities of age ─ affection from a pet takes on new
meaning. A pet’s continuing affection becomes crucially
important for ① those enduring hardship because it reassures
them that their core essence has not been damaged. Thus pets
are important in the treatment of ② depressed or chronically ill
patients. In addition, pets are ③ used to great advantage with
the institutionalized aged. In such institutions it is difficult for
the staff to retain optimism when all the patients are declining
in health. Children who visit cannot help but remember
④ what their parents or grandparents once were and be
depressed by their incapacities. Animals, however, have no
expectations about mental capacity. They do not worship
youth. They have no memories about what the aged once
⑤ was and greet them as if they were children. An old man
holding a puppy can relive a childhood moment with complete
accuracy. His joy and the animal’s response are the same.
Fremont Art Collegeʼs 7th Annual
ART EXHIBITION
November 21－27
3rd Floor Gallery in the Student Union
Hours: 10:00 a.m.－5:00 p.m. (Monday － Friday)
11:00 a.m.－3:00 p.m. (Saturday & Sunday)
∙Fremont Art College will be hosting its 7th Annual
Art Exhibition for one week.
∙Paintings, ceramic works, and photographs submitted
by students will be exhibited. All exhibits are for sale,
and all money raised will be donated to charity.
∙The exhibition is free to all.
∙Taking photos is allowed inside the exhibition hall.
∙Free snacks will be available at the cafeteria.
For more information, please visit our website at
www.fremontart.edu.
Fall Festival at Forest Botanic Gardens
October 1－October 31
◈ Morning Walk
－ The number of participants is limited to 20.
－ The walk will be cancelled in the event of rain.
◈ Fun Activities
－ Enjoy exciting activities such as kite flying and
sandcastle building for free.
－ Spend a day or two camping.
◈ Tips for Your Visit
－ Sitting on lawns is not permitted.
－ Audio devices may only be used with headphones.
◈ Parking
－ The parking lot is open from 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. every
day.
－ The parking fee is $10 a day.
◈ For more information, visit www.fffbg.com.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은?
When teachers work in isolation, they tend to see the world
through one set of eyes ─ their own. The fact that there might
be someone somewhere in the same building or district who
may be more successful at teaching this or that subject or
lesson is (A) based / lost on teachers who close the door and
work their way through the school calendar virtually alone. In
the absence of a process that (B) allows / forbids them to
benchmark those who do things better or at least differently,
teachers are left with that one perspective ─ their own. I
taught various subjects under the social studies umbrella and
had very little idea of how my peers who taught the same
subject did what they did. The idea of meeting regularly to
compare notes, plan common assessments, and share what we
did well (C) mostly / never occurred to us. Rather, we spent
much time in the social studies office complaining about a
lack of time and playing the blame game.
(A) (B) (C)
① based …… allows …… never
② based …… forbids …… mostly
③ lost …… allows …… mostly
④ lost …… allows …… never
⑤ lost …… forbids …… never
30. 밑줄 친 he[his]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Dr. Paul Odland and his friend Bob travel frequently to
South America, where they provide free medical treatment for
disabled children of poor families. One day, they went to a
local marketplace. Paul wanted to buy some souvenirs, and
① he spotted a carving that he liked. The non-English
speaking seller was asking 500 pesos for the carving. With Bob
acting as interpreter, Paul offered 300 and ② his opponent
proposed 450. The bargaining in the noisy market became
spirited, even intense, with Paul stepping up ③ his price
slightly and the seller going down slowly. The pace increased
so fast that Bob could not keep up with the back-and-forth
interpretation. Meanwhile, observing the seller carefully, Paul
sensed something wrong in Bob’s interpretation. In fact, the
seller had gone below Paul’s last offer. When Paul raised his
doubt, Bob instantly recognized the error and corrected ④ his
interpretation. At length, they settled the deal, and ⑤ he was
delighted to purchase the carving at a reasonable price and
thanked Bob.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The creativity that children possess needs to be cultivated
throughout their development. Research suggests that
overstructuring the child’s environment may actually limit
creative and academic development. This is a central problem
with much of science instruction. The exercises or activities
are devised to eliminate different options and to focus on
predetermined results. The answers are structured to fit the
course assessments, and the wonder of science is lost along
with cognitive intrigue. We define cognitive intrigue as the
wonder that stimulates and intrinsically motivates an
individual to voluntarily engage in an activity. The loss of
cognitive intrigue may be initiated by the sole use of play
items with predetermined conclusions and reinforced by rote
instruction in school. This is exemplified by toys, games, and
lessons that are a(n) in and of themselves and
require little of the individual other than to master the planned
objective. [3점]
* rote : 기계적인 암기
① end ② input ③ puzzle
④ interest ⑤ alternative
32. Temporal resolution is particularly interesting in the
context of satellite remote sensing. The temporal density of
remotely sensed imagery is large, impressive, and growing.
Satellites are collecting a great deal of imagery as you read
this sentence. However, most applications in geography and
environmental studies do not require extremely fine-grained
temporal resolution. Meteorologists may require visible,
infrared, and radar information at sub-hourly temporal
resolution; urban planners might require imagery at monthly
or annual resolution; and transportation planners may not
need any time series information at all for some applications.
Again, the temporal resolution of imagery used should
. Sometimes
researchers have to search archives of aerial photographs to
get information from that past that pre-date the collection of
satellite imagery. [3점]
* meteorologist : 기상학자 ** infrared: 적외선의
① be selected for general purposes
② meet the requirements of your inquiry
③ be as high as possible for any occasion
④ be applied to new technology by experts
⑤ rely exclusively upon satellite information
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6
8
33. Grief is unpleasant. Would one not then be better off
without it altogether? Why accept it even when the loss is
real? Perhaps we should say of it what Spinoza said of regret:
that whoever feels it is “twice unhappy or twice helpless.”
Laurence Thomas has suggested that the utility of “negative
sentiments” (emotions like grief, guilt, resentment, and anger,
which there is seemingly a reason to believe we might be
better off without) lies in their providing a kind of guarantee
of authenticity for such dispositional sentiments as love
and respect. No occurrent feelings of love and respect need
to be present throughout the period in which it is true that
one loves or respects. One might therefore sometimes
suspect, in the absence of the positive occurrent feelings, that
. At such times,
negative emotions like grief offer a kind of testimonial to the
authenticity of love or respect. [3점]
* dispositional: 성향적인 ** testimonial: 증거
① one no longer loves
② one is much happier
③ an emotional loss can never be real
④ respect for oneself can be guaranteed
⑤ negative sentiments do not hold any longer
34. Over a period of time the buildings which housed social,
legal, religious, and other rituals evolved into forms that we
subsequently have come .
This is a two-way process; the building provides the physical
environment and setting for a particular social ritual such as
traveling by train or going to the theater, as well as the
symbolic setting. The meaning of buildings evolves and
becomes established by experience and we in turn read our
experience into buildings. Buildings arouse an empathetic
reaction in us through these projected experiences, and the
strength of these reactions is determined by our culture, our
beliefs, and our expectations. They tell stories, for their form
and spatial organization give us hints about how they should be
used. Their physical layout encourages some uses and inhibits
others; we do not go backstage in a theater unless especially
invited. Inside a law court the precise location of those
involved in the legal process is an integral part of the design
and an essential part of ensuring that the law is upheld. [3점]
* empathetic : 공감할 수 있는
① to identify and relate to a new architectural trend
② to recognize and associate with those buildings’ function
③ to define and refine by reflecting cross-cultural interactions
④ to use and change into an integral part of our environment
⑤ to alter and develop for the elimination of their meanings
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Most often, you will find or meet people who introduce
themselves in terms of their work or by what they spend time
on. These people introduce themselves as a salesman or an
executive. ① There is nothing criminal in doing this, but
psychologically, we become what we believe. ② Identifying
what we can do in the workplace serves to enhance the quality
of our professional career. ③ People who follow this practice
tend to lose their individuality and begin to live with the notion
that they are recognized by the job they do. ④ However, jobs
may not be permanent, and you may lose your job for
countless reasons, some of which you may not even be
responsible for. ⑤ In such a case, these people suffer from an
inevitable social and mental trauma, leading to emotional
stress and a feeling that all of a sudden they have been
disassociated from what once was their identity.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Interestingly, being observed has two quite distinct
effects on performance. In some cases, performance is
decreased, even to the point of non-existence. The
extreme of this is stage fright, the sudden fear of public
performance.
(A) So, if you are learning to play a new sport, it is better to
begin it alone, but when you become skilled at it, then
you will probably perform better with an audience.
(B) There are many instances of well-known actors who, in
mid-career, develop stage fright and simply cannot
perform. The other extreme is that being observed
enhances performance, people doing whatever it might
be better when they know that others are watching.
(C) The general rule seems to be that if one is doing
something new or for the first time, then being observed
while doing it decreases performance. On the other hand,
being observed while doing some task or engaging in
some activity that is well known or well practiced tends
to enhance performance.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7
8
37.
Evolution works to maximize the number of descendants
that an animal leaves behind. Where the risk of death from
fishing increases as an animal grows, evolution favors
those that grow slowly, mature younger and smaller, and
reproduce earlier.
(A) Surely these adaptations are good news for species
hard-pressed by excessive fishing? Not exactly. Young
fish produce many fewer eggs than large-bodied animals,
and many industrial fisheries are now so intensive that
few animals survive more than a couple of years beyond
the age of maturity.
(B) This is exactly what we now see in the wild. Cod in
Canada’s Gulf of St. Lawrence begin to reproduce at
around four today; forty years ago they had to wait until
six or seven to reach maturity. Sole in the North Sea
mature at half the body weight they did in 1950.
(C) Together this means there are fewer eggs and larvae to
secure future generations. In some cases the amount of
young produced today is a hundred or even a thousand
times less than in the past, putting the survival of species,
and the fisheries dependent on them, at grave risk. [3점]
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Most readers of reports and papers are reading the
documents because they are interested in, and know
something about, the subject.
What is the best order for a report, paper or other technical
document? Of course, it must be logical; but that means
simply that the paper must have connection and sequence,
and a variety of orders is possible under this heading. Too
many writers interpret the term logical to mean chronological,
and it has become habitual to begin reports and papers with
careful reviews of previous work. ( ① ) Usually, this is
tactically weak. ( ② ) Therefore, to rehearse to them the
findings of previous work is simply to bore them with
unnecessary reminders. ( ③ ) The interesting thing for them
is the new information ─ the new findings and conclusions.
( ④ ) So it is usually best to start with those pieces of
information. ( ⑤ ) To give a long chronological account of
work or procedures is normally appropriate only when the
essential point of the paper is the chronological sequence.
* chronological: 연대순의
39.
Rather, they will happen only through state intervention,
based on parliamentary decision.
I expect that global society will increase annual investments
from 24% today to 36% of the GDP in 2052. Much of this
investment will be in energy-efficient goods that are more
expensive than old-fashioned stuff designed for an era of
cheap energy. ( ① ) Another share will be invested in the shift
from coal to more expensive fuels, like conventional gas. ( ② )
Some will go into the construction of new renewable energy
supply, even during the years before it becomes competitive.
( ③ ) And a lot will go into repair of climate damage or
adaptation to future climate damage ─ for example, investing
in new protective walls along the coast to keep the rising
ocean back. ( ④ ) These huge increases in investment would
not come about if investment was left to the market. ( ⑤ ) It
will be either direct, when the government invests the tax
dollars in whatever capacity it considers to be most necessary,
or indirect, when the government passes legislation that makes
the desired activity more profitable.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The impacts of tourism on the environment are evident
to scientists, but not all residents attribute environmental
damage to tourism. Residents commonly have positive
views on the economic and some sociocultural influences
of tourism on quality of life, but their reactions to
environmental impacts are mixed. Some residents feel
tourism provides more parks and recreation areas,
improves the quality of the roads and public facilities, and
does not contribute to ecological decline. Many do not
blame tourism for traffic problems, overcrowded outdoor
recreation, or the disturbance of peace and tranquility of
parks. Alternatively, some residents express concern that
tourists overcrowd the local fishing, hunting, and other
recreation areas or may cause traffic and pedestrian
congestion. Some studies suggest that variations in
residents’ feelings about tourism’s relationship to
environmental damage are related to the type of tourism,
the extent to which residents feel the natural environment
needs to be protected, and the distance residents live from
the tourist attractions.
* tranquility: 고요함 ** congestion: 혼잡
󰀻
Residents do not (A) tourism’s environmental
influences identically since they take (B) postures
based on factors such as the type of tourism, opinions on
the degree of protection, and their distance from an attraction.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① weigh …… dissimilar ② weigh …… common
③ weigh …… balanced ④ control …… favorable
⑤ control …… conflicting
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Duration refers to the time that events last. If we think of
tempo as the speed of events, then duration is the speed of
the clock itself. For the physicist, the duration of a “second”
is precise and unambiguous: it is equal to 9,192,631,770
cycles of the frequency associated with the transition
between two energy levels of the isotope cesium-133. In the
realm of psychological experience, however, quantifying
units of time is a considerably clumsier operation. When
people are removed from the cues of “real” time ─ be it the
sun, bodily fatigue, or timepieces themselves ─ it doesn’t
take long before their time sense breaks down. And it is this
usually (A) psychological clock, as opposed to the
time on one’s watch, that creates the perception of duration
that people experience.
Theoretically, a person who mentally stretches the duration
of time should experience a slower tempo. Imagine, for
example, that baseballs are pitched to two different batters.
The balls are thrown every 5 seconds for 50 seconds, so a
total of 10 balls are thrown. We now ask both batters how
much time has passed. Let’s say that batter number one (who
loves hitting) feels the duration to be 40 seconds. Batter
number two (bored by baseball) believes it to be 60 seconds.
Psychologically, then, the first person has experienced
baseballs approaching every four seconds while the second
sees it as every six seconds. The perceived tempo, in other
words, is (B) for batter number one.
* isotope: 동위원소 ** clumsy: 서투른
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① What Timepieces Bring to Our Lives
② Research into Time: Precision vs. Duration
③ Flight from Time: A New Direction for Physics
④ The Peaceful Coexistence of Science and Baseball
⑤ How Long, How Fast: A Matter of Time Perception
42. 윗글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① delayed …… faster ② internal …… slower
③ accurate …… slower ④ imprecise …… faster
⑤ mysterious …… slower
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
A seventeen-year-old German boy named Erik Brandes
stepped out onto the empty vast stage of the Cologne Opera
House. It was the most exciting day of Erik’s life. (a) The
youngest concert promoter in Germany had persuaded the
Opera House to host a late-night concert of improvised jazz
by the American pianist Keith Jarrett. The concert was a
sellout, and later that evening, Keith would sit down at the
piano and play.
* improvise: 즉흥적으로 연주하다
(B)
When Keith began to play, everybody immediately knew
this was magic. Erik too was deeply touched. Keith was
unexpectedly producing the performance of a lifetime
despite the shortcomings of the piano. (b) His left hand
produced thundering, repetitive bass riffs as a way of
covering up the piano’s lack of resonance. Keith really had
to play that piano very hard to get enough volume to get to
the balconies. Standing up and sitting down, Keith played
the unplayable piano to produce something unique. It wasn’t
the music that he ever imagined playing. But faced with a
challenge, he accepted it and flew high.
* bass riff: 저음 반복 악절 ** resonance: 울림, 반향
(C)
Understandably, Keith didn’t want to perform. He left and
went to wait in his car, leaving Erik to anticipate the arrival
of soon-to-be furious concert-goers. Desperate, (c) the
German teenager caught up with Keith and begged the jazz
pianist to play. The pianist looked out at him standing in the
rain, completely soaked, and took pity on him. “Never
forget,” Keith said. “Only for (d) you.” A few hours later,
Keith walked out to the unplayable piano in front of a
packed concert hall.
(D)
But when Erik introduced Keith and his producer Manfred
to the piano on the stage that afternoon, it didn’t go well.
Keith and Manfred played a few notes. Then after a long
silence, Manfred came to (e) him and said, “Erik, if you
don’t get another piano, Keith can’t play tonight.” Erik knew
that Keith had requested a specific instrument, which the
Opera House had agreed to provide. What he hadn’t realized
was that the administrative staff hadn’t been able to find the
requested Bösendorfer piano, and they had instead installed
a tiny little Bösendorfer that was in poor condition.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 연주회의 표가 매진되었다.
② 연주가 시작되자마자 관객들은 감동을 받았다.
③ Keith는 충분한 피아노 음량을 만들기 위해 노력했다.
④ Keith는 빗속에 서 있는 Erik을 보고도 외면했다.
⑤ Keith와 Manfred는 연주회장의 피아노를 쳐 보았다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I think reading newspapers is boring.
② No, they deliver the paper around 6 a.m.
③ Well, I’d prefer to read the news on paper.
④ I heard the printing ink is very harmful, though.
⑤ You owe me $100 for two months’ subscription.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That’s reasonable. I’ll take those glasses.
② Sure. You may go during the lunch break.
③ All right. You can play soccer after school.
④ It’s your fault. You need to pay the repair bill.
⑤ That’s too bad. You should have worked harder.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고
르시오.
① 도서관 후원 단체의 회원을 모집하려고
② 도서관 확장 공사의 일정을 공지하려고
③ 도서관의 헌책 나눔 행사를 홍보하려고
④ 도서관에 대한 정부 지원을 촉구하려고
⑤ 도서관의 평생 교육 프로그램을 안내하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 예습과 복습을 꾸준히 해야 한다.
② 지킬 수 있는 학습 계획을 세워야 한다.
③ 남을 가르치면서 더 많은 것을 배울 수 있다.
④ 풀이 과정을 적는 것이 수학 공부에 효율적이다.
⑤ 사실의 단순 암기보다 개념의 이해에 충실해야 한다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 건물 관리인–건물주
② 부동산 중개인–세입자
③ 이사 업체 직원–집주인
④ 가전제품 수리 기사–고객
⑤ 배달 업체 직원–꽃집 주인
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고
르시오.
①
②
④ ③
⑤
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 휴대 전화 방수 케이스 사기
② 여행 사진 인화 신청하기
③ 빌려준 텐트 찾아오기
④ 캠프장 위치 확인하기
⑤ 래프팅 예약하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 제주도 여행을 취소한 이유를 고르시오.
① 사촌과 함께 보낼 일정이 생겨서
② 계절 학기 수업을 수강해야 해서
③ 가족과 말레이시아에 가야 해서
④ 시간제 일자리를 구해야 해서
⑤ 콘서트 연습과 시간이 겹쳐서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $6 ② $8 ③ $10 ④ $12 ⑤ $14
10. 대화를 듣고, Kite Flying Competition에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 날짜 ② 장소 ③ 참가비
④ 심사 기준 ⑤ 상품
11. Spring Walking Day에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오.
① 학부모도 참가할 수 있다.
② 3월 마지막 토요일에 개최된다.
③ 교문에서 출발하여 5km를 걷는다.
④ 점심과 물이 무료로 제공된다.
⑤ 행사 당일에 참가 등록이 가능하다.
2017학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역 1
제 3 교시
영어 영역 2
2 8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 선택한 애완동물 운반
용 가방을 고르시오.
Pet Carriers
Model Foldable Size Color Price
① A ○ Small Gray $25
② B × Small Yellow $25
③ C ○ Medium Gray $30
④ D ○ Medium Yellow $30
⑤ E ○ Large Gray $35
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① Wonderful choice! You won’t regret.
② Okay. The shipping is $3 per address.
③ Don’t worry. We’ll keep them for you.
④ I’m sorry. The last pair has just been sold.
⑤ Never mind. Let me call the store right away.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① You’re right. Then I should email the cards.
② I understand. I should make the cards myself.
③ Yeah. This would be a great birthday present.
④ Then, please drive them home after the party.
⑤ Not at all. I’ve already invited all my classmates.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Carla가 노신사에게 할 말로 가장 적
절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Carla:
① Do you have any specific model in mind?
② Then, could you tell me your budget range?
③ Everyone has a different taste, so I can’t tell.
④ If you get her these earphones, she’d be happy.
⑤ Headphones would be better for listening to music.
[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① selecting good vegetable seeds
② growing vegetables and fruits in pots
③ managing indoor humidity using plants
④ using sand to store vegetables and fruits
⑤ mixing sand and soil for a vegetable garden
17. 언급된 채소나 과일이 아닌 것은?
① carrots ② onions ③ potatoes ④ apples ⑤ pears
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
We hope you enjoyed your recent stay with Youth
Hostels Association. We are continually striving to
improve the services we offer to our guests and we
hope you will take the opportunity to inform us about
what you really think. Your feedback is important to us
and we would be grateful if you could spare a few
minutes to share your experience and opinions. Complete
the survey now and you will be entered into a FREE
monthly prize draw, and will have the chance to win
£200 worth of overnight vouchers to be used with your
next booking, at any Youth Hostel of your choice in
England and Wales. We appreciate your feedback.
① 경품 당첨 소식을 알리려고
② 예약 취소 불가를 통지하려고
③ 시설 훼손 비용을 청구하려고
④ 설문 조사 참여를 요청하려고
⑤ 숙박 시설 개장을 홍보하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Before I could get off my horse, I heard a disturbing
sound. Charlie heard it, too. He stopped abruptly and backed
quickly away from the sound. The rattling sound seemed to
echo down the river. As I turned my head, I caught a
glimpse of a brown and gray curled creature. The rattlesnake
was in position to strike. Fear gripped my heart and it
pounded furiously. My hands began to sweat and my legs
were trembling. I knew any slight movement might make the
deadly snake strike. I had only one choice: to get Charlie out
of danger. He had the same idea. He spun quickly, avoiding
the rattlesnake’s attack. As we reached a safe distance, my
heart rate began to slow to its regular rhythm. I patted
Charlie’s head and said, “Good boy. You saved my life.”
① frightened →relieved ② cheerful →upset
③ curious→disappointed ④ bored →excited
⑤ ashamed →grateful
20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Anyone who has tried to complete a jigsaw puzzle as the
clock ticked on toward a deadline knows that the more they
struggle to find the missing pieces, the harder it is to find
them. As soon as the clock stops, on the other hand, the
pieces virtually find each other. Why do the answers we
missed in an exam so often occur to us as soon as we turn
in the test? The answer, surely, is that we are trying too
hard. We are trying in an anxious or frustrated way, and not
surprisingly, this makes us tense up. This kind of trying
results from doubt. If we didn’t doubt our ability to perform
the task at hand, we wouldn’t need to try. You don’t “try” to
sit down and pick up the newspaper when you get home
from work, do you?
① 스트레스 유발 요인은 사람마다 다양하다.
② 적당한 긴장감은 집중력과 수행 속도를 향상한다.
③ 과도한 경쟁의식은 성급한 상황 판단을 부추긴다.
④ 적절한 휴식은 암기력을 향상하는 데 도움이 된다.
⑤ 자기 능력을 의심하면 과도하게 애쓰다가 일을 그르친다.
영어 영역 3
3 8
21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Deposits of oil lie under the frozen ground, or tundra, of
Alaska. Scientists and engineers have the technology needed
to get this oil out of the ground and move it across the
state through pipelines. Some people support drilling for
Alaska’s oil and moving it over the land in pipes. Other
people fear that digging into the tundra will be harmful to
the environment. They also fear that aboveground
pipelines
and spilled oil may harm the plants and animals in the
region. People who are opposed to drilling in Alaska don’t
want to take the benefits of having more oil with the
potential bad effects on the environment. Other people feel
that this tradeoff is worth the benefits it will give to the
community, or to the country as a whole. Still others say
new technology should be developed to reduce the dangers
to the environment before drilling is allowed.
① growing concerns of shrinking tundra
② geographical features of Alaskan tundra
③ conflicting views on drilling for Alaska’s oil
④ negative effects of oil spill on the environment
⑤ necessity of developing a new drilling technology
[22 ~ 23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. It has been estimated that every $1.00 spent on locally
produced foods returns (or circulates) $3.00 to $7.00 within
the community. Consumers buy produce and other goods
from local farmers, who buy farm supplies from local
businesses. Those businesses help to keep people in the
community employed, and, in turn, they spend their money
back in the community. This helps to encourage a thriving
community and increases the economic health of the region.
In addition, when farmers have direct access to consumers,
they are able to keep more of each dollar earned from a
sale, because the middleman
is eliminated. This increases
profits to producers and keeps their farms competitive with
the traditional retail chain stores. Purchasing local produce
not only improves the local economy, but it can also help
you stretch your food dollar and get highquality
fruits and
vegetables.
① Buy Locally, Create a Positive Chain Effect
② Are Locally Produced Foods High in Quality?
③ Purchase Fresh Foods, Make the World Green
④ The Local Farmer as a New Community Leader
⑤ Who Benefits from the Traditional Retail Chain?
23. Chalk and blackboards first made their mark in higher
education at elite military schools at the start of the 19th
century. Decades of war and geopolitical turmoil, combined
with sweeping changes to the scale and social organization of
governments, put a new premium on training large groups of
elite civil and military engineers. Mathematics was their
essential tool, and would also become a gateway subject for
efficiently sorting the best and brightest. Blackboards offered
instructors a way of working quickly and visibly in front of
the large groups of elite students who would now need to
know mathematics to a greater degree than ever before. They
also provided a setting for discipline, allowing those
instructors to examine and correct the work of many students
at once or in succession as they solved problems at the
board.
* turmoil: 혼란
① The Advancement of Elite Education Institutes
② Math Instructors: Mentors for Future Engineers
③ Mathematics: A Key Factor of Military Campaigns
④ Military Schools’ Roles in the Progress of Science
⑤ Blackboard: A Setting of Math Education for Elites
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The two pie charts above show the percentages of
foreigntrained
doctors who were working in the U.S. in 2013
and in the UK in 2014 by countries of origin. ①Doctors who
were trained in India represented the largest part both in the
U.S. and in the UK. ②In the U.S., the percentage of doctors
from the Caribbean islands and the EU countries took up more
than onetenth,
respectively. ③Doctors who were trained in
Africa accounted for a greater percentage in the UK than in
the U.S. ④The percentage of Pakistantrained
doctors in the
UK was more than double that in the U.S. ⑤In the U.S., the
percentage of doctors from the EU countries was lower than
that of the doctors from Canada and Mexico combined.
영어 영역 4
4 8
25. A. Manette Ansay에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
Awardwinning
author A. Manette Ansay was born in
Michigan in 1964, and grew up in Wisconsin. She was
talented at playing the piano when young and subsequently
trained as a concert pianist, attending the Peabody
Conservatory of Music. However, by the age of 21 she had to
give up the pursuit because of ill health, and by 23 she began
writing in need of another outlet for her creative energies.
Since then, she has become a bestselling
novelist. After her
time at Peabody, she worked for a while at the American
Museum of Natural History before returning to school at the
University of Maine to study anthropology. Since the 1990s,
her health has gradually stabilized, though there are still times
when even writing is challenging. Ansay went on to study and
work at Cornell University, and then became an assistant
professor at Vanderbilt University.
① 어린 시절에 피아노 연주에 재능이 있었다.
② 23세 무렵에 글을 쓰기 시작했다.
③ 미국 자연사 박물관에서 근무한 적이 있다.
④ 1990년대 이후 건강을 완전히 회복했다.
⑤ Vanderbilt 대학교의 조교수가 되었다.
26. King Clay Pottery Classes에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하는 것은?
King Clay Pottery Classes
Join our pottery classes and learn how to make pots
on the wheel. Each class consists of mixed levels of
students.
▪ Maximum class size: 10 students
▪ Schedule of classes
‒ Monday, Tuesday, Thursday: 7 p.m. ‒ 10 p.m.
‒ Wednesday: 1 p.m. ‒ 4 p.m.
‒ The studio is also open to all
students from 1 p.m. to 5 p.m.,
Saturday. There is no instruction
but you can work on whatever you want.
▪ Fee: $340 for a tenweek
session. This fee
includes Saturday studio time and all materials.
For more information, call Rebecca at (703) 543‒7654
or email her at theclayking@pottery2017.net.
① 동일한 수준의 수강생으로 반이 구성된다.
② 반은 최소 10명으로 구성된다.
③ 수요일에는 오후 7시부터 수업이 진행된다.
④ 토요일에도 강습을 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 수강료에 모든 재료비가 포함되어 있다.
27. Creatures of the Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하
지 않는 것은?
Creatures of the Night
Experience the wonders of night animals and their
amazing adaptations to nature at the annual Creatures of
the Night.
Friday, April 7th, 2017
5 p.m. until 10 p.m.
At Oak Forest Park (OFP)
▸ Enjoy exciting activities!
⦁Meet night creatures, such as owls, fireflies, and
more!
⦁Search for live bats and meet a bat ecologist.
⦁Watch a puppet theater.
⦁Take a guided night hike.
▸ Program fee
Full price: $8
OFP member: $6
Children 2 and under: free
Food will be available for purchase from a food truck.
Preregistration
is recommended!
① 오후 5시부터 오후 10시까지 진행된다.
② 박쥐 생태학자를 만날 수 있다.
③ 안내원이 동행하는 야간 하이킹이 있다.
④ OFP 회원은 참가비가 무료다.
⑤ 먹거리 트럭에서 음식을 구입할 수 있다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
One of the simplest and most effective ways to build
empathy in children ①is to let them play more on their
own. Unsupervised kids are not reluctant to tell one another
how they feel. In addition, children at play often take on
other roles, pretending to be Principal Walsh or Josh’s mom,
happily forcing ②themselves to imagine how someone else
thinks and feels. Unfortunately, free play is becoming rare.
Boston College research professor Peter Gray has
documented a continuous and ③ultimately dramatic decline
in children’s opportunities to play and explore in their own
chosen ways over the past fifty years in the United States
and other developed countries. The effects have been
especially ④damaged, he argues, to empathy. He concludes
that a decline of empathy and a rise in narcissism are
exactly ⑤what we would expect to see in children who
have little opportunity to play socially.
* empathy: 공감, 감정 이입
영어 영역 5
5 8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은? [3점]
Until the twentieth century, when composers began
experimenting freely with form and design, classical music
continued to follow basic rules relating to structure, not to
mention harmony. There still was room for (A) conformity/
individuality ―the great composers didn’t follow the rules,
but made the rules follow them―yet there was always a
fundamental proportion and logic behind the design. Even
after many of the rules were (B) maintained / overturned
by radical concepts in more recent times, composers, more
often than not, still organized their thoughts in ways that
produced an overall, unifying structure. That’s one reason
the atonal, incredibly complex works by Arnold Schönberg or
Karlheinz Stockhausen, to name two twentiethcentury
Modernists, are nonetheless (C) approachable / inaccessible .
The sounds might be very strange, but the results are still
decidedly classical in terms of organization.
* atonal: 무조의, 장조나 단조 등의 조를 따르지 않는
(A) (B) (C)
① conformity ···· maintained ··· approachable
② individuality ···· overturned ··· approachable
③ individuality ···· maintained ··· approachable
④ individuality ···· maintained ··· inaccessible
⑤ conformity ···· overturned ··· inaccessible
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Mrs. Smith, an intelligent woman in her sixties, has
suffered a massive stroke, affecting the back portions of her
right cerebral hemisphere. She has perfectly preserved
intelligence ―and humor. ①She sometimes complains to her
nurse that she has not put dessert or coffee on her tray.
When the nurse says, “But, it is right there, on the left,”
Mrs. Smith does not seem to understand what ②she says,
and does not look to the left. If the nurse gently turns Mrs.
Smith’s head, so that the dessert comes into sight, in the
preserved right half of ③her visual field, she says, “Oh,
there it is ―it wasn’t there before.” Actually, ④she has
totally lost the idea of “left.” Sometimes, she complains that
her portions are too small, but this is because she only eats
from the right half of the plate ―it does not occur to ⑤her
that it has a left half as well.
* cerebral hemisphere: 대뇌 반구
[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Recent research by Juliet Zhu and J. J. Argo suggests that
making subtle changes to the seating arrangements in
meetings can have an effect on what people choose to focus
their attention on. For example, the study found that circular
seating arrangements typically activated people’s need to
belong. As a result, they were more likely to focus on the
group’s collective objectives and be persuaded by messages
and proposals that highlighted group benefits rather than
benefits to any one individual. This effect was reversed,
however, when the seating arrangement was either angular
(think Lshaped)
or square. These seating arrangements
tended to activate people’s need for . As a
result, people were more responsive and reacted more
favorably to messages and proposals that were selforiented
and that allowed them to elevate their individualism.
① uniqueness ② safety ③ certainty
④ harmony ⑤ fairness
32. Much of the communication among chimps, as for animals
in general, is . One prime example
involved six young chimpanzees being studied in the 1970s
at the Delta Primate Research Center. One of them (we’ll
call him the “leader”) was introduced alone into an enclosure
and shown either a hidden source of food or a stuffed
snake. When this chimp was reunited with his fellows
outside the enclosure, they quickly resumed their normal
activities. There was no readily apparent sign that the leader
communicated his important knowledge to the other chimps.
Yet, when all six were allowed into the enclosure after the
leader had been shown food, the group headed straight for
the food. In the “snake” condition, the chimps all entered the
enclosure with the fur on their backs spiking up and
approached the danger zone with extreme caution, poking at
the leaf bed with sticks rather than with their hands. Either
the leader chimp had conveyed the information to the others,
or they were superbly attuned to his intentions. [3점]
* enclosure: 울타리로 둘러싸인 구역
① affected by their habitat
② too subtle for us to notice
③ rarely relationshiporiented
④ readily open to other species
⑤ surprisingly inferior to that of ours
영어 영역 6
6 8
33. Science and technology degrees are rewarding because
they are not designed . If you are
taking a highly specialized or vocational degree, you may
well know what career you are aiming for even before you
get to university, but for most science and technology
undergraduates university is an adventure in itself; ideas
about a career may be in your thoughts, but not completely
fixed. This gives you the advantage of knowing that you can
develop your career ideas as your course progresses, aware
that your degree will be of help to you in many areas of
work. It is perhaps with this in mind that science and
technology degree programs tend to be wide in scope and
flexible in approach. You might go to university to study
chemistry and find yourself doing some work within the
physics department. [3점]
① to represent a socially privileged status
② necessarily to be obtained in the university
③ to force you to follow the established scholars
④ only to grade you and make you feel frustrated
⑤ exclusively to get you into a job and keep you there
34. It’s a common practice during creativity seminars to give
participants a bag full of materials and then a problem to
solve. The materials are usually everyday items. Their use
is obvious to all. You are then to use those materials in
whatever ways you want to solve the problem; however,
there isn’t usually an obvious connection between the items
and your problem. For instance, maybe you have to figure
out how to create a communication device using a hammer,
tape, a hairbrush, and a bag of marbles. Most people have a
cognitive bias called functional fixedness that causes them to
see objects only in their normal context. The use of the
materials in their ordinary way will generally lead to no
workable solutions. The really exciting solutions come from
overcoming functional fixedness and using these everyday
items in new ways. To see the possibilities it is helpful to
take the viewpoint that . [3점]
① good tools make fine work
② nothing is what you think it is
③ having many options is not a blessing
④ the more we know, the more we want
⑤ deep learning is composed of small parts
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Parents play a huge role in every aspect of their children’s
life, even in the athletic aspect. ①It is a good thing for
parents to encourage and support their children in sports
which interest them, and this involves forming a good
relationship with the children’s coach. ②Parents and coaches
then should help hand in hand to foster a positive athletic
atmosphere for players. ③Coaches then should exert extra
effort in getting to know the parents of their players, and
by so doing, determine ways by which parents are willing to
help their children and the team in general. ④Competitive
sports should be avoided for children because they are more
likely to cause injuries. ⑤When parents and coaches have a
dialogue, they also learn more about each other’s
expectations and this leads to a better relationship between
them as well.
[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Government goods and services are, by and large,
distributed to groups of individuals through the use of
nonmarket rationing.
(A) The provision of national defense services is one strong
example of a good that is freely available to all and not
rationed by prices. In other cases, criteria such as
income, age, residence, or the payment of certain taxes
or charges are used to determine eligibility to receive
benefits.
(B) This means that government goods and services are not
made available to persons according to their willingness
to pay and their use is not rationed by prices. In some
cases, the services are available to all, with no direct
charge and no eligibility requirements.
(C) For example, to receive Social Security pensions in the
United States, individuals must be of a certain age, have
worked for a certain period of time (about 10 years)
while covered by Social Security, and must have paid
their share of Social Security taxes during that time.
[3점]
*rationing: 배분 **eligibility: 자격
① (A) - (C) -(B) ② (B)- (A) -(C)
③ (B) - (C) -(A) ④ (C)- (A) -(B)
⑤ (C) - (B) -(A)
영어 영역 7
7 8
37.
Why do meteorologists measure temperature in the
shade, rather than in the Sun? Aren’t people more
interested in the temperature in the Sun? Why don’t
they report it?
(A) So a thermometer in the Sun does not measure the air
temperature. On the other hand, the temperature of the
air in the shade is usually the same as that in the Sun.
So if you really want to know the temperature of the
sunlit air, measure it in the shade.
(B) However, if you put a thermometer in direct sunlight, the
redcolored
alcohol absorbs more sunlight than does the
transparent air. That makes the thermometer hotter than
the air. Of course, heat will flow from the thermometer
into the air, but if the Sun keeps shining on the
thermometer, the thermometer will always be hotter.
(C) It turns out that there is a good reason. Thermometers
are supposed to measure air temperature. When you
place them in a room, they eventually reach the same
temperature as the air.
*meteorologist: 기상학자
① (A) -(C) -(B) ② (B) - (A) -(C)
③ (B) -(C) -(A) ④ (C) - (A) -(B)
⑤ (C) -(B) -(A)
[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Twentyfive
years ago, The Road Less Traveled, by
psychiatrist M. Scott Peck, was just another
psychology/relationship book lying unnoticed on
bookstore shelves.
The movie industry is obviously affected by personal
recommendations. Even though well over a billion dollars is
spent every year on promoting new movies, people talking
to people is what really counts. ( ① ) According to Marvin
Antonowsky, head of marketing for Universal Pictures, “Word
of mouth is like wildfire.” ( ② ) This point is well
illustrated by the number of lowbudget
movies that have
succeeded with little or no advertising―and by the number
of bigbudget
flops. ( ③ ) Like the movies, book publishing
is another industry where lots of money is traditionally spent
on advertising but can’t begin to compete with the power of
friends telling friends about their discoveries. ( ④ ) Then a
few people read it, told their friends, and started a chain
reaction that is still going on. ( ⑤ ) Today, there are well
over two million copies in print.
*flop: 실패작
39.
An object smaller than the distance between waves is
a poor receiver for those waves.
Infrasound has the special characteristic of traveling well
in the ground or water; in fact, the waves of an earthquake
can be thought of as a form of infrasound. ( ① ) Because
sound travels much faster in ground than in air,
groundborne
vibrations, if perceived, can serve as an early
warning system, arriving well before airborne sound from the
same source arrives. ( ② ) Infrasound dissipates less
rapidly in air, making it ideal for longdistance
communication. ( ③ ) Perception of infrasound, however,
presents some specific problems. ( ④ ) Thus, infrasonic
receivers need to be large and tend to be found on the large
animals able to generate infrasound. ( ⑤ ) This is probably
the reason that infrasonic communication is used by only a
few animals, and the best understood infrasonic
communication system is the African elephants’.
*infrasound: 초저주파음 **dissipate: 소멸하다
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Getting firstrate
health care will always be quite
different from ordering something from an online
bookstore. We’re talking about the most precious part of
life ―one’s health ―not buying a book. But the common
thread is the power of information and individualization.
We are embarking on a time when each individual will
have all their own medical data and the computing power
to process it in the context of their own world. There
will be comprehensive medical information about a
person that is highly accessible, analyzable, and
transferable. This will set up a fundamental power shift,
putting the individual at center stage. No longer will MD
stand for medical deity. What have been called the six
most powerful words of the English language — “The
doctor will see you now” — will no longer be true. Indeed
you will still be seeing doctors, but the relationship will
be radically altered.
* embark on: ~에 들어가다 ** deity: 신(神)

The (A) of medical information will be greatly
improved, which will give more power to (B) than
ever before.
(A) (B)
① availability ···· patients
② availability ···· doctors
③ credibility ···· researchers
④ credibility ···· patients
⑤ productivity ···· doctors

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
A group of researchers designed a study about
recycling. Participants were told that they would be
evaluating a new brand of scissors. The process required
them to rate how good the scissors were at cutting out
shapes from a stack of 200 sheets of plain white paper.
Half the participants tested the scissors in a room where
there weren’t any recycling facilities, only a trash can.
The other half completed the task in a room where
recycling facilities were available in addition to a regular
trash can. The participants were purposely not given any
specific instructions about the sizes of the shapes or the
amount of paper that they should use in the task.
Instead they were simply told to dispose of any scraps
in the containers provided. Then they completed a “green
attitude” questionnaire that asked them about their
beliefs and attitudes toward the environment.
The results were quite simply startling. Participants
who evaluated the scissors when recycling facilities were
available used nearly three times more paper than the
group who didn’t have recycling facilities. Interestingly,
this increase in the use of resources occurred regardless
of how positive the participants’ “green attitudes” were,
as measured in the poststudy
questionnaire. So this
study demonstrated that the of paperrecycling
facilities caused people to actually use more paper.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① How Recycling Can Save the Economy
② Green Attitude: A Key to Sustainable Living
③ Why Evaluation Processes Must Be Objective
④ Paper and Steel: The Most Important Resources
⑤ Recycling Effort May Lead to an Unwanted Result
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① presence ② diversity ③ shortage
④ expense ⑤ standardization
[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Amy works as a receptionist for a small company. She
is perfect for her job and everyone around her office
loves (a) her. If a coworker has a personal problem, she
knows Amy will find the silver lining. If others have
good news, Amy is the first one with whom they’ll
share it. One day, Amy learned that her mother had
been diagnosed with a serious illness, so she took a
oneweek
leave of absence to be with her. During that
week, various people in the office took turns covering
for her.
(B)
Instead of seeing the company owner’s decision as a
relief, her coworkers gathered together and went to see
the owner. They told her that they didn’t want Amy to
be replaced and that they were willing to continue
covering for her. It took Amy’s mother another few
weeks to recover well enough for Amy to return to
work. During that time, her coworkers faithfully kept to
their word and covered for (b) her.
(C)
Unfortunately, Amy’s mother took a turn for the worse
and Amy was forced to take more time off. Before long,
(c) she ran out of paid leave and had to arrange to take
unpaid leave. After a month, the company’s owner felt
that the burden on the others in the office had become
too great. So she told the human resources department
to find Amy’s replacement. Soon word got around the
office that the company was looking to replace (d) her.
(D)
It was over those last few weeks that the owner
realized Amy was a great encourager for her employees.
In the many years since (e) she had founded the
company, she had never perceived any of the
receptionists who had worked there as irreplaceable. In
fact, she was so impressed by their dedication to Amy.
When Amy finally returned, the owner asked her into
her office and informed her that she was going to pay
her for the time she had been away.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) -(C) ② (C)- (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) -(B) ④ (D) - (B) -(C)
⑤ (D) -(C) -(B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Amy는 병에 걸린 어머니와 함께 있으려고 휴가를 냈다.
② 사장이 Amy를 교체하기로 한 결정에 동료들은 안도했다.
③ 어머니의 병세가 악화되어 Amy는 휴가를 연장해야 했다.
④ 사장은 Amy를 대체할 사람을 찾으라고 인사과에 말했다.
⑤ Amy가 돌아오자 사장은 Amy를 자신의 사무실로 불렀다.
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① He’s a gardener.
② She’s taking a picture.
③ It’s next to Central Zoo.
④ It’s open 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
⑤ I’m not free this weekend.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. You can teach me French later.
② Okay. I’ll make a reservation for five people.
③ No problem. They’ve already had lunch.
④ Of course. I really love these five books.
⑤ No. They didn’t come to the meeting.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 글쓰기 특강 참석을 독려하려고
② 효과적인 학습 전략을 소개하려고
③ 교내 수학 동아리 회원을 모집하려고
④ 온라인 설문 조사 일정을 공지하려고
⑤ 장학금 신청 방법 변경 사항을 안내하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 좋은 대본을 쓰려면 다양한 경험이 필요하다.
② 충분한 수면은 기억력 강화에 도움이 된다.
③ 반복적인 연습은 좋은 결과를 낳는다.
④ 건강을 위해서 일찍 일어나야 한다.
⑤ 실수는 성공의 밑거름이 된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 편집장 － 기자
② 서점 직원 － 학생
③ 인쇄소 직원 － 교사
④ 기계 수리공 － 경비원
⑤ 실내 디자이너 － 건축가
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 경고 방송하기 ② 게시판 만들기
③ 경고문 복사하기 ④ 사무실 청소하기
⑤ 불법 광고물 제거하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 청력이 나빠진 이유를 고르시오.
① 시끄러운 음악을 헤드폰을 쓰고 자주 들어서
② 도서관 공사 소음에 오랫동안 노출되어서
③ 과도한 업무에 대한 스트레스 때문에
④ 귓속에 이물질이 들어가서
⑤ 신체 노화로 인하여
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $54 ② $60 ③ $70 ④ $81 ⑤ $90
10. 대화를 듣고, ‘I Care, We Cure’ 행사에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 목적 ② 프로그램 ③ 장소
④ 초청 강사 ⑤ 입장료
11. Orange Tree Day Care Center에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치
하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① Green Oak Park 옆에 위치해 있다.
② 연령에 알맞은 다양한 활동을 제공한다.
③ 울타리가 있는 놀이터가 있다.
④ 점심 식사와 함께 신선한 과일을 제공한다.
⑤ 월요일부터 토요일까지 문을 연다.
2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2 8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 프로그램을
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① I’ll record your performance with my phone.
② We’ll look for pictures of famous pianists.
③ I still have time to visit my uncle.
④ Your parents will get well soon.
⑤ The audience was not so big.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Sure. I often let my students go home early.
② Exactly. The video clip wasn’t helpful at all.
③ True. The professor was praised for his hard work.
④ Yeah. You should’ve gone to the lecture yesterday.
⑤ Right. We shouldn’t focus only on results when praising students.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Lucy가 Ben에게 할 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
Lucy:
① Sorry. Your flight is canceled due to bad weather.
② Come on. We need to leave for the airport now.
③ That’s okay. They arrived there on time.
④ Welcome. Thank you for flying with us.
⑤ Never mind. We can meet on Saturday.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① necessity of teaching hunting skills
② various ways to feed young animals
③ animal fathers’ dedication to parenting
④ sacrifice of animal mothers for their babies
⑤ importance of animal reproduction in the wild
17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① emperor penguin ② bullfrog
③ seahorse ④ giant water bug
⑤ sea catfish
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Mr. Stevens,
This is the chief editor of Novel Flash Fiction. As you
were informed by our staff last week, your short story will be
published in the December issue of Novel Flash Fiction. We
thought hearing how you came up with your story would be
meaningful to our readers. We would thus like to ask if you
could give a speech about your writing process. This speech
is expected to last for about an hour, and it will take place at
Star Bookstore downtown. You can choose a specific date
and time depending on your schedule. If you have any
questions, please contact us by e-mail at editors@nff.com.
We look forward to hearing how you wrote your story.
Sincerely,
Susanna Martinez
① 소설 창작 과정에 관한 강연을 요청하려고
② 강연 일정이 변경된 것에 대해 사과하려고
③ 새로 발간된 잡지의 정기 구독을 권유하려고
④ 출판물 편집에 관한 유의 사항을 안내하려고
⑤ 잘못된 기사 내용에 대해 정정을 요구하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Kate의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sipping coffee leisurely at a café, Kate was enjoying the
view of the Ponte Vecchio across the Arno. As an architect
and professor, she had taught about the historical significance
of the bridge to her students for years. A smile crept across
her face. It was her first time to actually see it in person.
Though not as old as the bridges of Rome, it was absolutely a
work of art. If the fleeing Nazis had destroyed it during World
War II, she would have never seen it. She was happy that she
could view the bridge in the twilight. Free from her daily
concerns, her mind began to wander from the unforgettable
views of the still Arno to all the unexpected but pleasant
encounters with other tourists. The trip was a rare liberating
experience. Kate felt that all her concerns had melted away.
① anxious and envious ② bored and indifferent
③ pleased and relaxed ④ confused and puzzled
⑤ disappointed and regretful
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sure, we’ve all heard the advice: “Follow your passion.” It’s
great when you hit the jackpot and find a career that melds your
strengths and passions, and where there is demand in the highly
competitive global marketplace of today. But if your goal is to get
a job at the end of the rainbow, you must distinguish between your
major, your passions, your strengths, and your career path. Your
strengths are more important than your passions. Studies show
that the best career choices tend to be grounded in things you’re
good at, more so than your interests and passions. Ideally, you want
to find a convergence of your strengths and your values with a
career path that is in demand. Interests can come and go. Your
strengths are your core, your hard-wired assets.
* meld: 섞다 ** convergence: 합류점
① 진로 계획을 세울 때 시장의 수요를 정확히 예측해야 한다.
② 직업을 선택할 때 본인의 강점을 우선적으로 고려해야 한다.
③ 자신의 분야에서 성공하기 위해서는 열정을 가져야 한다.
④ 원하는 직업을 갖기 위해서는 전공을 잘 선택해야 한다.
⑤ 취업을 준비할 때 다른 사람의 조언을 잘 들어야 한다.
 이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3 8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Parents are quick to inform friends and relatives as soon as
their infant holds her head up, reaches for objects, sits by
herself, and walks alone. Parental enthusiasm for these motor
accomplishments is not at all misplaced, for they are, indeed,
milestones of development. With each additional skill, babies
gain control over their bodies and the environment in a new
way. Infants who are able to sit alone are granted an entirely
different perspective on the world than are those who spend
much of their day on their backs or stomachs. Coordinated
reaching opens up a whole new avenue for exploration of
objects, and when babies can move about, their opportunities
for independent exploration and manipulation are multiplied.
No longer are they restricted to their immediate locale and to
objects that others place before them. As new ways of
controlling the environment are achieved, motor development
provides the infant with a growing sense of competence and
mastery, and it contributes in important ways to the infant’s
perceptual and cognitive understanding of the world.
* locale: 현장, 장소
① 유아의 운동 능력 발달은 유아의 다른 발달에 기여한다.
② 부모와의 정서적 교감은 유아의 지적 호기심을 자극한다.
③ 부모의 관심은 유아의 균형 있는 신체 발달에 필수적이다.
④ 주변 환경의 변화는 유아기 운동 능력 발달을 촉진한다.
⑤ 유아는 시행착오를 통해 공간 지각 능력을 발달시킨다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
It is a strategic and tactical mistake to give an offensive
position away to those who will use it to attack, criticize, and
blame. Since opponents will undoubtedly attack, criticize, and
blame, anyway, the advantages of being proactive, airing one’s
own “dirty laundry,” and “telling on oneself” are too significant
to ignore. Chief among these advantages is the ability to control
the first messages and how a story is first framed. That leaves
others having to respond to you instead of the other way around.
This approach is appropriately termed “stealing thunder.”
When an organization steals thunder, it breaks the news about
its own crisis before the crisis is discovered by the media or
other interested parties. In experimental research by Arpan and
Roskos-Ewoldsen, stealing thunder in a crisis situation, as
opposed to allowing the information to be first disclosed by
another party, resulted in substantially higher credibility
ratings. As significant, the authors found that “credibility
ratings associated with stealing thunder directly predicted
perceptions of the crisis as less severe.”
* dirty laundry: 치부, 수치스러운 일
① necessity of being cooperative in a crisis situation
② importance of taking the initiative in managing a crisis
③ problem of creating false stories to save an organization
④ significance of remaining silent in strengthening credibility
⑤ advantage of improving the corporate image through media
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
If you’ve ever seen the bank of flashing screens at a
broker’s desk, you have a sense of the information overload
they are up against. When deciding whether to invest in a
company, for example, they may take into account the people
at the helm; the current and potential size of its market; net
profits; and its past, present, and future stock value, among
other pieces of information. Weighing all of these factors can
take up so much of your working memory that it becomes
overwhelmed. Think of having piles and piles of papers,
sticky notes, and spreadsheets strewn about your desk, and
you get a picture of what’s going on inside the brain. When
information overloads working memory this way, it can make
brokers ― and the rest of us ― scrap all the strategizing and
analyses and go for emotional, or gut, decisions.
* at the helm: 실권을 가진 ** strewn: 표면을 뒤덮은
① How Information Overload Can Cloud Your Judgment
② Multitasking Increases Your Working Memory!
③ How to Prevent Information Flood
④ Do Flashing Screens Reduce Information Overload?
⑤ Emotional Judgment: The Secret of Successful Brokers
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows direct expenditures on education as a
percentage of GDP for the five OECD countries with the
highest percentages in 2011, by level of education. ① All the
five countries spent over seven percent of their GDP on direct
expenditures on education for all institutions combined. ② Of
the five countries, Denmark spent the highest percentage of GDP
for all institutions combined. ③ In terms of direct expenditures
on elementary and secondary education, New Zealand spent
the highest percentage of GDP among the five countries. ④ As
for direct expenditures on postsecondary education, Iceland
spent a higher percentage of GDP than the other four countries.
⑤ Compared with the Republic of Korea, Israel spent a lower
percentage of GDP on postsecondary education.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4 8
25. Albert C. Barnes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Born into a working-class family in 1872, Albert C. Barnes
grew up in Philadelphia. He became interested in art when he
became friends with future artist William Glackens in high
school. He earned a medical degree from the University of
Pennsylvania and qualified as a doctor in 1892. Barnes
decided not to work as a doctor, and after further study he
entered the business world. In 1901, he invented the antiseptic
Argyrol with a German chemist and made a fortune. Using his
wealth, he began purchasing hundreds of paintings. In 1922,
he established the Barnes Foundation to promote the education
of fine arts. There he displayed his huge collection without
detailed explanation. He died in a car accident in 1951.
* antiseptic: 소독제, 방부제
① 1872년에 태어나 Philadelphia에서 성장했다.
② University of Pennsylvania에서 의학 학위를 받았다.
③ 독일인 화학자와 함께 Argyrol을 발명하였다.
④ 미술 교육을 장려하기 위해 Barnes Foundation을 설립했다.
⑤ 자세한 설명과 함께 소장품을 전시했다.
26. Mountaintop Yodeling Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
Mountaintop Yodeling Contest
Show off your yodeling skills with the backdrop of the
beautiful Alps.
∙Place: special outdoor stage set up at Mt. Billatus (2,545 m)
∙Time & Date: 2:00 p.m. on June 12, 2017
∙Registration (online only): until June 1 (www.yodel.net)
∙Requirements
- All contestants should sing a 2-minute yodel of their choice.
- All yodels should be sung either in French or in English.
∙Prizes
- 1st place: a round-trip airplane ticket to London
- 2nd place: a Swiss watch
* The contest will be canceled if the weather is unfavorable.
① Mt. Billatus에 설치된 특별 야외무대에서 열린다.
② 등록 기한은 6월 1일까지이다.
③ 프랑스어나 영어로 요들을 불러야 한다.
④ 2등 상품은 London 왕복 항공권이다.
⑤ 날씨가 좋지 않으면 취소된다.
27. Summerville Forest Trail Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
Summerville Forest Trail Tour
Just five miles away from the big city, you can enjoy
the huge variety of plants and wildlife at Summerville
Forest. We offer a trail tour every Saturday from June to
September. Come and join us!
Tickets
∙$10 (for 8 and older)
∙$5 (for children under 8)
* Snacks and water will be provided.
Tour Schedule
∙8:30 a.m.－9:00 a.m. Introduction to Summerville Forest
∙9:00a.m.－11:00 a.m. Trail Walking Tour
Reservations should be made online (www.summerville.net)
at least one week in advance of your visit.
① 6월부터 9월까지 매주 일요일에 진행된다.
② 8세 미만 아이들은 무료로 참가할 수 있다.
③ 간식과 물이 제공된다.
④ Summerville Forest에 대한 소개가 한 시간 동안 진행된다.
⑤ 온라인 예약은 방문 하루 전까지 해야 한다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Though most bees fill their days visiting flowers and
collecting pollen, some bees take advantage of the hard
work of others. These thieving bees sneak into the nest of an
① unsuspecting “normal” bee (known as the host), lay an egg
near the pollen mass being gathered by the host bee for her
own offspring, and then sneak back out. When the egg of the
thief hatches, it kills the host’s offspring and then eats the
pollen meant for ② its victim. Sometimes called brood
parasites, these bees are also referred to as cuckoo bees,
because they are similar to cuckoo birds, which lay an egg in
the nest of another bird and ③ leaves it for that bird to raise.
They are more ④ technically called cleptoparasites. Clepto
means “thief” in Greek, and the term cleptoparasite refers
specifically to an organism ⑤ that lives off another by
stealing its food. In this case the cleptoparasite feeds on the
host’s hard-earned pollen stores.
* brood parasite: (알을 대신 기르도록 하는) 탁란 동물
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5 8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
Some coaches erroneously believe that mental skills
training (MST) can only help perfect the performance of
highly skilled competitors. As a result, they shy away from
MST, (A) denying / rationalizing that because they are not
coaching elite athletes, mental skills training is less important.
It is true that mental skills become increasingly important at
high levels of competition. As athletes move up the competitive
ladder, they become more homogeneous in terms of physical
skills. In fact, at high levels of competition, all athletes have
the physical skills to be successful. Consequently, any small
difference in (B) physical / mental factors can play a huge
role in determining performance outcomes. However, we can
anticipate that personal growth and performance will progress
faster in young, developing athletes who are given mental
skills training than in athletes not exposed to MST. In fact, the
optimal time for introducing MST may be when athletes are
first beginning their sport. Introducing MST (C) early / later
in athletes’ careers may lay the foundation that will help them
develop to their full potential.
* homogeneous: 동질적인 ** optimal: 최적의
(A) (B) (C)
① denying …… physical …… later
② denying …… mental …… early
③ rationalizing …… physical …… early
④ rationalizing …… physical …… later
⑤ rationalizing …… mental …… early
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Medicine became big business with the expansion of new,
higher-cost treatments and the increased numbers of health
care providers in the United States. As more health care
providers entered the market, competition increased among
①them. Interestingly, the increase in competition led health
care providers to recommend more services to the persons
②they served. This phenomenon reflects a unique feature in
the health care industry ― provider-induced demand, which
allows health care providers to maintain ③their income even
as competition increases. Average consumers of health care
do not know how to diagnose ④ their medical conditions and
do not have a license to order services or prescribe
medications. So consumers rely on the knowledge of health
care providers to determine what services are needed, even
though ⑤ they stand to make more money by ordering more
services.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Interest in extremely long periods of time sets geology and
astronomy apart from other sciences. Geologists think in
terms of billions of years for the age of Earth and its oldest
rocks ― numbers that, like the national debt, are not easily
comprehended. Nevertheless, the
are important for environmental geologists because they
provide a way to measure human impacts on the natural
world. For example, we would like to know the rate of natural
soil formation from solid rock to determine whether topsoil
erosion from agriculture is too great. Likewise, understanding
how climate has changed over millions of years is vital to
properly assess current global warming trends. Clues to past
environmental change are well preserved in many different
kinds of rocks.
① time scales of geological activity
② global patterns in species diversity
③ regional differences in time perception
④ statistical methods for climate projections
⑤ criticisms of geological period classifications
32. Politics cannot be suppressed, whichever policy process is
employed and however sensitive and respectful of differences
it might be. In other words, there is no end to politics. It is
wrong to think that proper institutions, knowledge, methods
of consultation, or participatory mechanisms can make
disagreement go away. Theories of all sorts promote the view
that there are ways by which disagreement can be processed
or managed so as to make it disappear. The assumption
behind those theories is that disagreement is wrong and
consensus is the desirable state of things. In fact, consensus
rarely comes without some forms of subtle coercion and the
absence of fear in expressing a disagreement is a source of
genuine freedom. Debates cause disagreements to evolve,
often for the better, but a positively evolving debate does not
have to equal a reduction in disagreement. The suppression of
disagreement should never be made into a goal in political
deliberation. A defense is required against any suggestion that
. [3점]
* consensus: 합의 ** coercion: 강압
① political development results from the freedom of speech
② political disagreement is not the normal state of things
③ politics should not restrict any form of difference
④ freedom could be achieved only through tolerance
⑤ suppression could never be a desirable tool in politics
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6 8
33. To make plans for the future, the brain must have an ability
to take certain elements of prior experiences and reconfigure
them in a way that does not copy any actual past experience or
present reality exactly. To accomplish that, the organism must
go beyond the mere ability to form internal representations,
the models of the world outside. It must acquire the ability to
. We can argue that
tool-making, one of the fundamental distinguishing features of
primate cognition, depends on this ability, since a tool does
not exist in a ready-made form in the natural environment and
has to be imagined in order to be made. The neural machinery
for creating and holding ‘images of the future’ was a
necessary prerequisite for tool-making, and thus for launching
human civilization. [3점]
① mirror accurate images of the world outside
② manipulate and transform these models
③ visualize the present reality as it is
④ bring the models back from memory
⑤ identify and reproduce past experiences faithfully
34. Since life began in the oceans, most life, including freshwater
life, has a chemical composition more like the ocean than fresh
water. It appears that most freshwater life did not originate in fresh
water, but is secondarily adapted, having passed from ocean to
land and then back again to fresh water. As improbable as this
may seem, the bodily fluids of aquatic animals show a strong
similarity to oceans, and indeed, most studies of ion balance in
freshwater physiology document the complex regulatory
mechanisms by which fish, amphibians and invertebrates
attempt to .
It is these sorts of unexpected complexities and apparent
contradictions that make ecology so interesting. The idea of a
fish in a freshwater lake struggling to accumulate salts inside
its body to mimic the ocean reminds one of the other great
contradiction of the biosphere: plants are bathed in an
atmosphere composed of roughly three-quarters nitrogen, yet
their growth is frequently restricted by lack of nitrogen. [3점]
* amphibian: 양서류 ** invertebrate: 무척추동물
① maintain an inner ocean in spite of surrounding fresh water
② attain ion balance by removing salts from inside their body
③ return to the ocean to escape from their natural enemies
④ rebuild their external environment to obtain resources
⑤ change their physiology in accord with their surroundings
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Since the concept of a teddy bear is very obviously not a
genetically inherited trait, we can be confident that we are
looking at a cultural trait. However, it is a cultural trait that
seems to be under the guidance of another, genuinely
biological trait: the cues that attract us to babies (high
foreheads and small faces). ① Cute, baby-like features are
inherently appealing, producing a nurturing response in most
humans. ② Teddy bears that had a more baby-like appearance
― however slight this may have been initially ― were thus
more popular with customers. ③ Teddy bear manufacturers
obviously noticed which bears were selling best and so made
more of these and fewer of the less popular models, to
maximize their profits. ④ As a result, using animal images
for commercial purposes was faced with severe criticism from
animal rights activists. ⑤ In this way, the selection pressure
built up by the customers resulted in the evolution of a more
baby-like bear by the manufacturers.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
It takes time to develop and launch products. Consequently,
many companies know 6—12 months ahead of time that
they will be launching a new product.
(A) This marketing technique is called demand creation. It
involves creating a buzz about a new potentially
revolutionary nutrient or training technique through
publishing articles and/or books that stimulate the
reader’s interest. Once this is done, a new product is
launched.
(B) Over a series of issues, you begin to see more articles
discussing this new nutrient and potential to enhance
training and/or performance. Then, after 4—6 months, a
new product is coincidentally launched that contains the
ingredient that has been discussed in previous issues.
Books and supplement reviews have also been used as
vehicles to promote the sale of fitness and nutrition
products.
(C) In order to create interest in the product, companies will
often launch pre-market advertising campaigns. In the
nutrition industry, articles are often written discussing a
new nutrient under investigation.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7 8
37.
There’s a direct counterpart to pop music in the classical
song, more commonly called an “art song,” which does
not focus on the development of melodic material.
(A) But the pop song will rarely be sung and played exactly
as written; the singer is apt to embellish that vocal line to
give it a “styling,” just as the accompanist will fill out the
piano part to make it more interesting and personal. The
performers might change the original tempo and mood
completely.
(B) Both the pop song and the art song tend to follow
tried-and-true structural patterns. And both will be
published in the same way ― with a vocal line and a
basic piano part written out underneath.
(C) You won’t find such extremes of approach by the performers
of songs by Franz Schubert or Richard Strauss. These will
be performed note for note because both the vocal and
piano parts have been painstakingly written down by the
composer with an ear for how each relates to the other. [3점]
* embellish: 꾸미다 ** tried-and-true: 유효성이 증명된
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
The net effect of this was that, although customers
benefited, the banks lost out as their costs increased but
the total number of customers stayed the same.
In mature markets, breakthroughs that lead to a major
change in competitive positions and to the growth of the
market are rare. ( ① ) Because of this, competition becomes
a zero sum game in which one organization can only win at
the expense of others. ( ② ) However, where the degree of
competition is particularly intense a zero sum game can
quickly become a negative sum game, in that everyone in the
market is faced with additional costs. ( ③ ) As an example
of this, when one of the major high street banks in Britain
tried to gain a competitive advantage by opening on Saturday
mornings, it attracted a number of new customers who found
the traditional Monday-Friday bank opening hours to be a
constraint. ( ④ ) However, faced with a loss of customers,
the competition responded by opening on Saturdays as
well. ( ⑤ ) In essence, this proved to be a negative sum
game.
39.
Human beings discovered this art thousands of years ago, and
they have invented several devices to make it easier and faster.
In fiber processing the word ‘spinning’ means two quite
different things. ( ① ) One is the formation of individual
fibers by squeezing a liquid through one or more small openings
in a nozzle called a spinneret and letting it harden. ( ② ) Spiders
and silkworms have been spinning fibers in this way for millions
of years, but chemists and engineers learned the procedure from
them only about a century ago. ( ③ ) In the other kind of
spinning ― sometimes called throwing to prevent confusion
with the first kind ― two or more fibers are twisted together to
form a thread. ( ④ ) The ancient distaff and spindle are
examples that were replaced by the spinning wheel in the Middle
Ages. ( ⑤ ) Later came the spinning jenny, the water frame,
and Crompton’s mule ― spinning machines that became
symbols of the Industrial Revolution. [3점]
* distaff and spindle: 실을 감는 막대와 추
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
When considered in terms of evolutionary success, many
of the seemingly irrational choices that people make do not
seem so foolish after all. Most animals, including our
ancestors and modern-day capuchin monkeys, lived very
close to the margin of survival. Paleontologists who study
early human civilizations have uncovered evidence that our
ancestors faced frequent periods of drought and freezing.
When you are living on the verge of starvation, a slight
downturn in your food reserves makes a lot more difference
than a slight upturn. Anthropologists who study people still
living in hunter-gatherer societies have discovered that they
regularly make choices designed to produce not the best
opportunity for obtaining a hyperabundant supply of food but,
instead, the least danger of ending up with an insufficient
supply. In other words, people everywhere have a strong
motivation to avoid falling below the level that will feed
themselves and their families. If our ancestors hadn’t
agonized over losses and instead had taken too many chances
in going after the big gains, they’d have been more likely to
lose out and never become anyone’s ancestor.
* agonize: 괴로워하다, 고민하다
󰀻
Our ancestors gave priority to (A) minimum
resources rather than pursuing maximum gains, and that
was the rational choice for human (B) from an
evolutionary perspective.
(A) (B)
① securing …… freedom
② sharing …… interaction
③ identifying …… exploration
④ sharing …… prosperity
⑤ securing …… survival
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8 8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
According to many sociologists, the study of what our
society calls ‘art’ can only really progress if we drop the
highly specific and ideologically loaded terminology of ‘art’,
‘artworks’ and ‘artists’, and replace these with the more
neutral and less historically specific terms ‘cultural forms’,
‘cultural products’ and ‘cultural producers’. These cultural
products ― be they paintings, sculptures, forms of music or
whatever ― should be regarded as being made by certain
types of cultural producer, and as being used by particular
groups of people in particular ways in specific social
contexts. By using the more neutral term ‘cultural products’
for particular objects, and ‘cultural producers’ for the people
who make those objects, the sociologist seeks to break with a
view that she/he sees as having dominated the study of
cultural forms for too long, namely trying to understand
everything in terms of the category ‘art’. This is a category
that is too limited and context-specific to encompass all the
different cultural products that people in different societies
make and use. It is a term that is also too loaded to take at face
value and to use naively in study of our own society. Since it
is in the interests of certain social groups to define some
things as ‘art’ and others as not, the very term ‘art’ itself
cannot be uncritically used by the sociologist who wishes to
understand how and why such labelling processes occur.
Quite simply, then, in order to study cultural matters, many
sociologists believe one has to the terms ‘art’,
‘artwork’ and ‘artist’ as the basis for our analysis. Instead,
these terms become important objects of analysis themselves.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Art: A Means to Overcome a Cultural Gap
② Interpreting Culture In and Out of Context
③ Different Forms of Art in the World of Culture
④ Cultural Diversity: Cornerstones of Civilizations
⑤ Culture as a Basis of Understanding the Concept of Art
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① reject ② borrow ③ introduce
④ stress ⑤ revive
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Andrew steadied his eyes upon the black and white
squares. He thought awhile before pushing his knight to an
unbeatable position. Now Andrew was sure he had beaten
Timothy Tandon, the winner of the 2016 National Chess
Championship. Andrew, whom nobody had noticed before
the tournament this year, came to progress to the final match.
After enjoying this memorable victory, Andrew headed straight
to the nursing home where (a) his sick grandad was staying.
(B)
It was the day of the final match. That morning Andrew had
received a call from the nursing home informing him that
Grandad’s condition had become serious. The news played
upon Andrew’s mind as (b) he started to play. After several
fierce battles, Andrew’s concentration wavered for a moment.
His mind travelled to his grandad, who was in another battle
for his life. It was then that Andrew made a big mistake! The
mistake was a fatal one, and it was all over. (c) He had lost.
(C)
Andrew arrived at the nursing home in a gloomy mood, but
he was blessed with good news. His grandad was recovering.
Andrew was greatly delighted, but (d) he could not help being
disappointed in a corner of his mind. “I tried my best to fulfill
your dream but I couldn’t make it,” Andrew said in
disappointment. “That’s all right,” said Grandad. “The real
lesson of chess is learning how to tame your mind. See, my
mind has won the battle over my body. I will recover soon and
see you become champion one day in perfect health.” Andrew
was relieved and smiled with joy.
(D)
When Andrew reached the nursing home, Grandad was
sitting up in bed. “You won the semi-final?” (e) he asked,
offering up a weak smile. Andrew nodded his head. Indeed,
Andrew’s grandad was his chess master. As a kid, Andrew
liked to observe Grandad play chess and often predicted his
moves even before he began to move the pieces. “Andrew,”
said Grandad, inspired by his grandson’s superb victory, “you
are now all set to fulfill my dream. Tomorrow you will surely
win the National Chess Championship.”
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Andrew에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 2016 National Chess Championship 우승자에게 승리를 거두었다.
② 할아버지의 병세에 관한 전화를 받고 결승전에서 큰 실수를 했다.
③ 결승전에서 패배한 사실을 할아버지에게 알리지 않았다.
④ 할아버지로부터 체스가 주는 교훈에 관하여 들었다.
⑤ 어렸을 때 할아버지의 체스 게임을 즐겨 봤다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. I like group writing.
② No thanks. I’m full already.
③ Okay. Let’s go to the cafeteria.
④ Great. Let’s check the grammar now.
⑤ You’re right. I’d rather work at home.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Great. You really did a good job.
② Don’t worry. I voted for her, too.
③ Well done. That’s exactly what I meant.
④ Of course, you will. I have no doubt about it.
⑤ What a good idea! It’ll be fun to run together.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 학교 오케스트라 연주회를 알리려고
② 공연 연습 일정 변경을 공지하려고
③ 고전 음악 감상법을 소개하려고
④ 음악실 사용 규칙을 안내하려고
⑤ 교내 방송부 부원을 모집하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 산책은 창의적 사고에 도움이 된다.
② 과학 교육은 분석 능력을 증진시킨다.
③ 달리기는 스트레스 해소에 효과적이다.
④ 학력 신장을 위해서는 체력 관리가 중요하다.
⑤ 우선순위를 정하는 것은 일의 효율을 높인다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 얼음 조각가 － 호텔 지배인
② 메이크업 아티스트 － 오페라 가수
③ 의상 디자이너 － 피겨 스케이팅 선수
④ 특수 촬영 감독 － 시나리오 작가
⑤ 동화 작가 － 출판사 편집장
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 음악 파일 확인하기
② 졸업생 인터뷰하기
③ 비디오 편집하기
④ 마이크 점검하기
⑤ 컴퓨터 가져오기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자의 이사를 도와줄 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 회사 야유회에 참석해야 해서
② 발표 자료를 준비해야 해서
③ 친구 병문안을 가야 해서
④ 부모님을 방문해야 해서
⑤ 해외 출장을 가야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36 ② $45 ③ $50 ④ $63 ⑤ $70
10. 대화를 듣고, Rainbow Lunch Box에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 판매 장소 ② 종류 ③ 크기
④ 가격 ⑤ 배달 여부
11. 10th Special Lecture에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① Robinson 교수가 강연자이다.
② 강연 주제는 야간 빛 공해이다.
③ 10월 2일 오후 4시에 열릴 것이다.
④ 청중은 150명으로 제한된다.
⑤ 입장권은 사전 구매가 가능하다.
2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 찻주전자를
고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Okay. Tell me the address of the store.
② Wow! That looks better than the original one.
③ Great. Thank you for having it repaired on time.
④ Terrific! Put my name on the waiting list, please.
⑤ Definitely. I want a refund for the vacuum cleaner.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I understand. Don’t blame Peter anymore.
② Perfect. I’ll ask him if he can take your place.
③ Thanks a million. The contest was a big success.
④ Absolutely. I’ll give you a hand with your speech.
⑤ Awesome. You can take him to the national finals.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Stephanie가 David에게 할 말로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Stephanie:
① Why don’t you major in art at university?
② I wish I had good presentation skills like you.
③ Would you join me for a visit to an art museum?
④ You should’ve come with me to the museum today.
⑤ It’s worth completing your assignments on your own.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① ways to update big data
② uses of big data in society
③ origin and history of big data
④ pros and cons of big data usage
⑤ limits of data analysis in business
17. 언급된 장소가 아닌 것은?
① playing fields ② schools ③ stores
④ hospitals ⑤ banks
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
* CPR(cardiopulmonary resuscitation) : 심폐 소생술
① 효과적인 긴급 구조 요령을 설명하려고
② 심폐 소생술 강좌를 교사에게 홍보하려고
③ 학교의 긴급 구조 교육 일정을 공지하려고
④ 심폐 소생술 강좌의 담당 강사를 모집하려고
⑤ 심폐 소생술 수강 교사의 만족도를 조사하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Lindsay의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
A tear rolled down Lindsay’s cheek. She thought she had
put her favorite toy, Blue Bunny, in her bag before school this
morning. She had ‘show and tell’ in class today, and she was
anxious. Her teacher, Mrs. Cline, might be angry that she had
forgotten to bring it. She quickly searched the classroom and
checked her bag one more time. Her precious Blue Bunny
was a gift from her father, who worked overseas. It was
nowhere to be found. Just then, Mrs. Cline appeared in the
doorway. “Mrs. Cline!” Lindsay cried. “I can’t find my toy to
show in class today. I’m sorry!” Mrs. Cline smiled gently. She
was holding the toy. “Oh, Mrs. Cline! Thank you. I thought I
had lost Blue Bunny!” Lindsay felt calm and comforted now
that she had her toy again.
① excited → confused ② jealous → relaxed
③ worried → relieved ④ pleased → stressed
⑤ joyful → upset
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Once you start to see praise for what it is ― and what it
does ― these constant little evaluative outbursts from adults
start to produce the same effect as fingernails being dragged
down a blackboard. You begin to root for a child to give his
teachers or parents a taste of their own treacle by turning
around to them and saying (in the same saccharine tone of
voice), “Good praising!” Still, it’s not an easy habit to break.
It can seem strange, at least at first, to stop praising; it can
feel as though you’re being chilly or withholding something.
But that, it soon becomes clear, suggests that we praise more
because we need to say it than because children need to hear
it. Whenever that’s true, it’s time to rethink what we’re doing.
What kids do need is unconditional support, love with no
strings attached. That’s not just different from praise ― it’s
the opposite of praise.
* treacle: 당밀, 달콤한 것
① 아이들을 칭찬하는 습관을 그만두어야 한다.
② 아이들의 눈높이에 맞는 조언을 해 주어야 한다.
③ 아이들의 행동에 대한 무조건적인 지지를 삼가야 한다.
④ 아이들에게 타인을 칭찬하는 습관을 길러 주어야 한다.
⑤ 아이들에게 감정을 솔직하게 표현하는 방법을 가르쳐야 한다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Dear Teachers,
We are pleased to introduce our company’s recently
launched emergency training program for teachers. Our
CPR class is the most common option for a school. We
make it easy for teachers to participate in CPR training at
a time to suit your school’s schedule. Our class offers you
full life-saving expertise that you can then use to deliver
vital support in emergencies. With the proper training,
you will be able to perform CPR quickly and effectively
and improve a sufferer’s chances of survival. To learn
more about our CPR course offerings, please visit our
website at www.thebestCPRedu.com.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
People sometimes make downward social comparisons ―
comparing themselves to inferior or worse-off others ― to feel
better about themselves. This is self-enhancement at work.
But what happens when the only available comparison target
we have is superior or better off than we are? Can
self-enhancement motives still be served in such situations?
Yes, they can, as captured by the self-evaluation maintenance
model. According to this theory, we shift between two
processes ― reflection and comparison ― in a way that lets us
maintain favorable self-views. In areas that are not especially
relevant to our self-definition, we engage in reflection,
whereby we flatter ourselves by association with others’
accomplishments. Suppose you care very little about your
own athletic skills, but when your friend scores the winning
goal during a critical soccer match, you beam with pride,
experience a boost to your self-esteem, and take delight in
her victory celebrations as if, by association, it were your
victory too.
* flatter : 치켜세우다, 아첨하다
① 타인과의 비교를 통해 자신에 대한 객관적 평가를 할 수 있다.
② 자기 분야와 관련 없는 사람들의 성공도 축하해 줄 필요가 있다.
③ 성취도가 낮은 사람들과의 비교는 자기발전에 도움이 되지 않는다.
④ 사람들은 성취도가 높은 사람과 자신을 비교하지 않는 경향이 있다.
⑤ 타인의 성취를 자신과 연결하여 긍정적인 자아상을 유지할 수 있다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Some psychologists believe that insight is the result of a
restructuring of a problem after a period of non-progress where
the person is believed to be too focused on past experience and
get stuck. A new manner to represent the problem is suddenly
discovered, leading to a different path to a solution heretofore
unpredicted. It has been claimed that no specific knowledge, or
experience is required to attain insight in the problem situation.
As a matter of fact, one should break away from experience
and let the mind wander freely. Nevertheless, experimental
studies have shown that insight is actually the result of
ordinary analytical thinking. The restructuring of a problem
can be caused by unsuccessful attempts in solving the problem,
leading to new information being brought in while the person
is thinking. The new information can contribute to a
completely different perspective in finding a solution, thus
producing the Aha! Experience.
* heretofore: 지금까지
① disadvantages of experience in creative thinking
② significance of analytical thinking in gaining insight
③ contribution of insight in forming a new perspective
④ necessity of separating insight from analytical thinking
⑤ difficulty of acquiring in-depth knowledge from experience
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
When consumers lack adequate information to make
informed choices, governments frequently step in to require
that firms provide information. In the United States, we are all
familiar with the mandatory nutritional information placed on
food products. The Securities and Exchange Commission that
monitors American stock markets forces firms to meet certain
reporting requirements before their stock can be listed on
exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange. Such
reporting helps ensure that private investors have reliable
information on which to base their investment decisions.
Often, however, these regulations do not work adequately, as
the Enron scandal in 2001 clearly illustrates. The oil trading
company Enron had cooked its books to overstate its
profitability in its mandated reports. One outcome of Enron’s
subsequent financial collapse was the introduction of new
regulations designed to improve the reliability of the
information that companies must provide to the public.
* mandatory : 의무적인 ** subsequent : (결과로서) 일어나는
① Financial Advice for Better Market Profitability
② The Emergence of New Business Opportunities
③ Ethical Stock Investment for Reliable Businesses
④ Disclosing Truth: The Push for Market Credibility
⑤ Inflated Figures: The Driving Force for Investment
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the number of multipurpose
industrial robots per 10,000 employees in 2011 for six selected
countries. ① All of the six countries have more multipurpose
industrial robots per 10,000 employees in automotive
industries than in all other industries. ② Among the countries
in the graph, Japan has the largest number of multipurpose
industrial robots per 10,000 employees in automotive
industries. ③While the Republic of Korea has the smallest
number of multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000
employees in automotive industries, it has the largest number
in all other industries. ④ Both the USA and the United
Kingdom have more than 600 units of multipurpose industrial
robots per 10,000 employees in automotive industries but
have fewer than 200 units in all other industries. ⑤ Among the
six countries in the graph, Japan, Italy, and Germany are the
top three countries for the number of multipurpose industrial
robots per 10,000 employees in automotive industries.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. brown tree snake에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
The brown tree snake has a large head with sticking-out
eyes. The head is distinct from the narrow neck. Its body
usually has a light brown background with a series of darker
markings or bands on it. The snake is about 38 centimeters
when it comes out of its egg, and usually reaches 1 to 2
meters long. This snake is infamous for causing the extinction
of the majority of native bird species in Guam. Shortly after
World War Ⅱ, the brown tree snake was accidentally brought
into Guam from its native range in the South Pacific,
probably as an unwanted passenger on a ship or plane. It is
not hunted or eaten by any other animals in Guam and is
therefore at the top of its food chain, which has led the snake
to increase dramatically in number.
① 큰 머리와 돌출된 눈을 가지고 있다.
② 일반적으로 몸 바탕색은 연한 갈색이다.
③ 알에서 나올 때 약 38센티미터이다.
④ 제2차 세계 대전 이전에 Guam으로 우연히 유입되었다.
⑤ Guam에서 먹이 사슬의 최상위에 있다.
26. Barrow High School Charity Collection Week에 관한 다음
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 지역 학생들을 돕기 위한 것이다.
② 의류, 가방, 책, 소형 전자 기기를 기부받는다.
③ 현금을 기부받는다.
④ 기부할 모든 물품은 상자에 넣어야 한다.
⑤ 9월 18일부터 기부를 받는다.
27. Best Booth Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는
것은?
① 참가비가 있다.
② 심사 기준 중에 디자인 독창성 항목이 있다.
③ 1등 상금은 2등 상금의 세 배이다.
④ 시상식은 10월 20일 금요일 오후 5시에 열린다.
⑤ 이메일로는 부스 등록을 받지 않는다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
The lack of real, direct experience in and with nature has
caused many children to regard the natural world as mere
abstraction, that fantastic, beautifully filmed place ① filled
with endangered rainforests and polar bears in peril. This
overstated, often fictionalized version of nature is no more
real ― and yet no less real ― to them than the everyday nature
right outside their doors, ② waits to be discovered in a child’s
way, at a child’s pace. Consider the University of Cambridge
study which found that a group of eight-year-old children was
able to identify ③ substantially more characters from animations
than common wildlife species. One wonders whether our
children’s inherent capacity to recognize, classify, and order
information about their environment ― abilities once essential
to our very survival ― is slowly devolving to facilitate life in
④ their increasingly virtualized world. It’s all part of ⑤ what
Robert Pyle first called “the extinction of experience.”
* peril: 위험 ** devolve : 퇴화하다
􀀣􀁂􀁓􀁓􀁐􀁘􀀁􀀩􀁊􀁈􀁉􀀁􀀴􀁄􀁉􀁐􀁐􀁍􀀁􀀤􀁉􀁂􀁓􀁊􀁕􀁚􀀁􀀤􀁐􀁍􀁍􀁆􀁄􀁕􀁊􀁐􀁏􀀁􀀸􀁆􀁆􀁌
Next week, we will be holding our school charity
collection to help local students. We welcome donations
of your gently-used items.
What to donate:
Clothes, bags, books, and small electronics
* No cash donations will be accepted.
How to donate:
Put all items into a box and write your name on it.
Leave your box at the collection point in our school gym.
When to donate:
From September 18 to September 22 (during normal
school hours)
Please try to remember to show your goodwill and
support! For more information, contact the school office
at 0093-1234-5678.
－ Gold Rose Flower Festival －
Best Booth Contest
The Best Booth Contest is one of the main events of
the Gold Rose Flower Festival. Participation in the
contest is free of charge, and the best-looking booths will
be chosen as winners. Please come and join in the fun!
Judging Standards
∙Use of this year’s “Fantasy” theme
∙Design originality
∙Votes received by visitors
Prizes
∙First place: $200
∙Second place: $100
∙Third place: $50
Contest Schedule
∙Judging: October 20－21 (Friday & Saturday) from
9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
∙Award ceremony: October 21 (Saturday) at 5:00 p.m.
Contest Registration
To register your booth, please email the festival manager
at mholden@bbcgrff.org.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
Why does the “pure” acting of the movies not seem
unnatural to the audience, who, after all, are accustomed in
real life to people whose expression is more or less indistinct?
Most people’s perception in these matters is not very sharp.
They are not in the habit of observing closely the play of
features of their fellow men ― either in real life or at the
movies. They are (A) disappointed / satisfied with grasping
the meaning of what they see. Thus, they often take in the
overemphasized expression of film actors more easily than any
that is too naturalistic. And as far as lovers of art are concerned,
they do not look at the movies for imitations of nature but for
art. They know that (B) artistic / real representation is always
explaining, refining, and making clear the object depicted.
Things that in real life are imperfectly realized, merely hinted
at, and entangled with other things appear in a work of art
complete, entire, and (C) free / inseparable from irrelevant
matters. This is also true of acting in film.
* entangle : 얽히게 하다
(A) (B) (C)
① disappointed …… artistic …… free
② disappointed …… real …… free
③ satisfied …… artistic …… inseparable
④ satisfied …… real …… inseparable
⑤ satisfied …… artistic …… free
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Most of us probably parent the way we were parented.
Louise, a mother who attended my seminars, shared how
① her mother dealt with sibling fighting. Louise said her
mother’s infamous threat was always, “If you kids don’t stop
fighting, ② I’m going to knock your three heads together!”
Louise and her siblings were always puzzled about the
specifics of how their mother would actually accomplish such
a task, which, thankfully, ③ she never attempted. But what
drove her mother to make this empty threat? Extreme
annoyance with the sibling arguments, probably. No doubt,
Louise’s mother had learned this threatening tactic from
④ her own mother, and, in the absence of any other parenting
tools she knew of, she said it to her own children, regardless
of whether it worked. If Louise had not learned the effective
parenting skills taught in the seminars, ⑤ she would probably
be using similarly ineffective threatening techniques with her
own children today!
* sibling: 형제(의), 자매(의)
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. One unspoken truth about creativity ― it isn’t about wild
talent so much as it is about . To find a few
ideas that work, you need to try a lot that don’t. It’s a pure
numbers game. Geniuses don’t necessarily have a higher
success rate than other creators; they simply do more ― and
they do a range of different things. They have more successes
and more failures. That goes for teams and companies too.
It’s impossible to generate a lot of good ideas without also
generating a lot of bad ideas. The thing about creativity is that
at the outset, you can’t tell which ideas will succeed and
which will fail. So the only thing you can do is try to fail
faster so that you can move onto the next idea.
* at the outset : 처음에
① sensitivity
② superiority
③ imagination
④ productivity
⑤ achievement
32. Let me spend a moment on the idea of adjusting to another
person’s mental orientation. What I mean is this. At any moment,
a person has a . The
person notices this rather than that, and she has feelings and
makes judgements about one rather than another aspect of
events. If she is hungry, for example, she may notice that a
shop is selling groceries; her friend may notice only that it sells
newspapers. If she is short of money, she may resent that the
fruit is overpriced; meanwhile her friend may feel tempted by
some juicy peaches. In one sense the two friends are
experiencing the same shop and its contents, but they are
having quite different experiences of that shop. A more
extreme case arises when one person comprehends things in a
peculiar and individual way, for instance, in mistaking the shop
for a cinema. [3점]
① desire to make better choices
② point of view similar to that of others
③ personal preference on where to shop
④ particular take on what is happening
⑤ tendency to stick to traditions
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. Externalization is the foundation from which many
narrative conversations are built. This requires a particular
shift in the use of language. Often externalizing conversations
involve tracing the influence of the problem in a child’s life
over time and how the problem has disempowered the child
by limiting his ability to see things in a different light. The
counsellor helps the child to change by deconstructing old
stories and reconstructing preferred stories about himself and
his life. To help the child to develop a new story, the
counsellor and child search for times when the problem has
not influenced the child or the child’s life and focus on the
different ways the child thought, felt and behaved. These
help the
child create a new and preferred story. As a new and preferred
story begins to emerge, it is important to assist the child to
hold on to, or stay connected to, the new story. [3점]
① exceptions to the problem story
② distances from the alternative story
③ problems that originate from the counsellor
④ efforts to combine old and new experiences
⑤ methods of linking the child’s stories to another’s
34. The narratives that people create to understand their
landscapes come to be viewed as marketable entities and a
source of income for residents. Landscapes with a strong
place identity have an advantage in marketing to tourists, as it
is relatively easy to compartmentalize and market their
narratives. Such places may have disadvantages as well,
however. If place identity is tied to a particular industry, local
residents may feel strongly attached to the definitions of place
that stem from involvement in that industry, and they may
in favor of one based
on a tourism industry. People rooted in landscape may feel
strong connections to other community members and may
resent the invasion of outsiders who they believe are different
and challenge their common identity. Finally, local residents
may feel that this process reduces their identities to mere
commercial transactions, and they may believe they sacrifice
what is unique and special about their place. [3점]
* entity: 실재 ** compartmentalize: 구획하다 *** transaction: 거래
① resist losing that identity
② stop persisting with the old tie
③ tolerate the shift of that industry
④ alienate themselves from that place
⑤ refuse the advantage of that industry
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
One of the hallmarks of evaluating the quality of a black tea
is by assessing how tightly the leaves are rolled. Generally,
higher-graded teas are teas with leaves that are tightly and
uniformly rolled. ① Lower-graded teas, on the other hand, are
teas with leaves that are loosely and inconsistently rolled.
②With that said, the tightness of the roll has more to do with
the steepability of a leaf than it does with the taste of a tea.
③ The rolling of leaves is done by machine or, sometimes, by
hand to break the cell walls of the leaves and release
essential oils. ④ Therefore, one should not evaluate the tea’s
drinkability or taste merely because its leaves are not tightly
rolled. ⑤ It is common to find that people prefer the taste of
looser rolled black teas over more expensive or more highly
graded black teas that have been tightly rolled.
* hallmark: 특징, 특질 ** steepability : (차를) 우려낼 수 있음
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
It has been said that eye movements are windows into
the mind, because where people look reveals what
environmental information they are attending to. However,
there is more to attention than just moving the eyes to look
at objects.
(A) You may have had this experience if you have been
reading a book and then suddenly become aware that
although you were moving your eyes across the page
and “reading” the words, you had no idea what you had
just read.
(B) Even though you were looking at the words, you
apparently were not paying attention. There is a mental
aspect of attention that involves processing that can
occur independently of eye movements.
(C) We can pay attention to things that are not directly in our
line of vision, as evidenced by the basketball player who
dribbles down court while paying attention to a teammate
off to the side, just before she throws a perfect pass
without looking. We can also look directly at something
without paying attention to it.
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
Today the term artist is used to refer to a broad range of
creative individuals across the globe from both past and
present. This rather general usage erroneously suggests
that the concept or word “artist” existed in original contexts.
(A) Inventions, ideas, and discoveries have been credited to
the persons who originated them. This view is also at the
core of the definition of an “artist.” Artists are perceived
to establish a strong bond with their art to the point of
combining into one “entity.”
(B) In contrast to the diversity it is applied to, the meaning of
this term continues to be mostly based on Western views
and values. Since the fifteenth century, this tradition has
been concerned with recognizing individual achievements.
(C) Art history has reinforced this oneness: A painting by
Pablo Picasso is called “a Picasso.” This union between
artists and their work has determined the essential qualities
of an artist: originality, authorship, and authenticity. [3점]
* authenticity: 진정함, 확실성
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
But the examination of the accuracy of information
obtained in this manner is not a simple matter.
The one area in which the Internet could be considered an
aid to thinking is the rapid acquisition of new information.
( ① ) But this is more fictional than real. ( ② ) Yes, the
simple act of typing a few words into a search engine will
virtually instantaneously produce links related to the topic at
hand. ( ③ ) What one often gets is no more than abstract
summaries of lengthy articles. ( ④ ) As a consequence, I
suspect that the number of downloads of any given scientific
paper has little relevance to the number of times the entire
article has been read from beginning to end. ( ⑤ ) My advice
is that if you want to do some serious thinking, then you’d
better disconnect the Internet, phone, and television set and try
spending twenty-four hours in absolute solitude.
39.
But it is no light matter to quickly and correctly pen a long
and complicated composition.
There are many instances of rapid work on the part of the
great composers; and their facility and quickness of
composition causes great wonder and admiration. ( ① ) But
our admiration is often misdirected. ( ② ) When we hear of
some of the speedy writing of great works by Mozart or
Mendelssohn, we might think that this speed was of the
composing power as well as of pen, but, in fact, such was
seldom the case. ( ③ ) These great musicians generally did
their composition mentally without reference to pen or piano,
and simply postponed the unpleasant manual labor of
committing their music to paper until it became absolutely
necessary. ( ④ ) Then they got credit for incredible rapidity
of composition. ( ⑤ ) One has only to copy a piece of music
or to try to put into notes some piece of music previously
memorized, to realize this. [3점]
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The weakness of local networks lies in their
self-containment, for they lack input as well as outreach. In
a classic study of urban politics, Herbert Gans found that
neighborhoods with the highest levels of solidarity often
were unable to block unfavorable policies and programs for
lack of ties to possible allies elsewhere in the city. It was for
this reason that Gans referred to them as “urban villagers.”
As the opposite of local networks, cosmopolitan networks
offer little solidarity and have little capacity to comfort and
sustain members. But members benefit from a constant
flow of new information and from the great reach of their
influence, even if it tends to be somewhat lacking in
strength. Local networks tend to be small. In contrast,
cosmopolitan networks can be huge. Thus, while the
“urban villagers” lacked ties even to their local city
government, cosmopolitan network ties often lead into the
White House.
* ally: 동맹국, 협력자
󰀻
Unlike the “urban villagers,” whose (A) ties to the
outside restrict them within their boundaries, cosmopolitan
networks (B) from exposure to new information
and a more extensive range of relationships.
(A) (B)
① loose …… profit
② loose …… stem
③ loose …… withdraw
④ close …… profit
⑤ close …… stem
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
An ecosystem that is altered or damaged in some way will
be out of balance with the biome for that area. For example,
if the local biome is forest, but the trees have been removed
from one area, then the ecosystem is out of balance. The
natural tendency is for plant species to move into that area,
bringing the ecosystem back towards the biome state. The
spread of a species into a new area is called colonisation. It
can happen naturally only if there are ecologically healthy
ecosystems nearby to provide plant seeds. Once the
vegetation has started to recover, insects, birds and other
animals will travel into the newly regenerated area.
These processes of ecological colonisation can be
supported by environmental . For example,
we are currently seeing important changes in the way
agriculture is carried out in Britain. Rather than just
maximising food production, farming is becoming more
environmentally friendly, with the support of financial
subsidies. This new approach increases biological diversity
by conserving hedges and the wildflowers, insects, birds and
other animals that live on the land. A proportion of
agricultural land is left completely uncultivated so that
species can gradually colonise it. This provides a habitat for
a wider range of species. Leaving some farmland as
set-aside is also a way to decrease overall production when
that is economically desirable. Note that set-aside land is
more permanent than fallow land, which is usually left for
only a year. Colonisation is a slow process, taking place over
years or even decades.
* biome: 생물군계 ** subsidy : 보조(금) *** fallow: 휴경
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Giving Land Back to Nature for Ecological Balance
② Colonisation: Mother Nature’s Shame or Pride?
③ Broken Ecosystems: Mankind’s Misconduct
④ Is Set-Aside Land Economically Desirable?
⑤ The Paradox of Eco-Friendly Farming
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① assessment ② competition ③ constancy
④ forces ⑤ management
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
An important lesson to remember is that we should try to
see the positives in life even while we are stuck in the
middle of trouble. Riccardo, who was named after his father,
an immigrant from Mexico, learned this lesson at a young
age. Although the family called him Ricky, his father had his
own nickname for him: Good-for-Nothing. Why did the
elder Riccardo call (a) him that? Because Ricky hated
fishing.
(B)
The nation came to know Ricky as the most complete
player of his generation, and he was voted into the Hall of
Fame. And his father, the elder Riccardo, what did he think
about it? Though he had wanted all of his sons to join the
family business, he was finally proud of Ricky and respected
his accomplishments. Ricky held onto hope in one of the
most difficult moments of (b) his life and achieved
greatness.
(C)
Since these jobs were not fishing, his father saw no value
in them. Young Ricky hated fishing. Everything would be
fine if it were not fishing, he thought to himself. Soon, Ricky
began to follow his older brother who used to play sandlot
ball. For Ricky, playing baseball with (c) him was a way to
forget his hardship. Fortunately, Ricky was very good at it,
and was treated like a hero among his playmates. When
Ricky was sixteen, he decided to drop out of school to
become a baseball player. And by the time he was through
with baseball, (d) he had become a legend.
* sandlot ball: 동네야구
(D)
His father saw this very negatively, because he was a
fisherman. He loved the fishing business. So did all of his
sons, except for Good-for-Nothing Ricky. The boy did not
like being on the boat, and the smell of fish made him sick.
Instead, Ricky ― who was not afraid of hard work ―
delivered newspapers, shined shoes, worked in the office, and
even repaired nets. (e) His income went to the family. Even
so, his father was strongly dissatisfied with him and still
always said that he was good for nothing.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Ricky에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 아버지의 이름을 따서 Riccardo라고 이름 지어졌다.
② 야구 선수로 성공했지만 아버지가 자랑스러워하지 않았다.
③ 야구 선수가 되기 위해 학교를 그만두기로 결심했다.
④ 아버지의 직업이 어부였다.
⑤ 힘든 일을 두려워하지 않았다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

1 8
 1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Not yet. I forgot to send it.
② Of course. You can have it.
③ Sorry. We’re sold out of pictures.
④ Right. You shouldn’t buy a book.
⑤ No, thanks. I don’t want an album.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll ask him if he’d like to.
② Too bad. He went back yesterday.
③ Exactly. I plan to visit Korea later.
④ No. I want to stay longer if possible.
⑤ Right. We haven’t been to Germany.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 스마트폰 사용 자제를 당부하려고
② 청취자의 문자 참여를 권유하려고
③ 프로그램 방송 시간 변경을 공지하려고
④ 라디오 앱의 새로운 기능을 소개하려고
⑤ 음원 불법 다운로드의 유해성을 경고하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 운동과 숙면은 밀접한 관계가 있다.
② 시골 생활은 건강한 삶에 도움이 된다.
③ 규칙적인 식습관은 장수의 필수 조건이다.
④ 야외 활동은 스트레스 해소에 효과적이다.
⑤ 가정의 화목은 가족 간의 대화에서 시작된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 시민 － 경찰관 ② 환자 － 간호사
③ 학생 － 소방관 ④ 고객 － 차량 정비사
⑤ 학부모 － 영양사
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 티셔츠 주문하기 ② 호텔 예약하기
③ 로고 디자인하기 ④ 출장 신청하기
⑤ 항공권 취소하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 영화를 보고 있는 이유를 고르시오.
① 맡은 배역을 더 잘 이해하고 싶어서
② 훌륭한 영화감독이 되고 싶어서
③ 좋아하는 장르의 작품이어서
④ 주연 배우들을 좋아해서
⑤ 작문 숙제를 해야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36 ② $45 ③ $54 ④ $60 ⑤ $63
10. 대화를 듣고, Winter Discovery Camp에 관해 언급되지 않은
것을 고르시오.
① 참가 대상 ② 활동 내용 ③ 기간
④ 기념품 ⑤ 참가비
11. Global Design Conference에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① Chicago에서 매년 개최된다.
② 유명 디자이너들의 강연이 있을 것이다.
③ 100명의 디자이너가 제작한 작품들이 전시될 것이다.
④ 6월 20일에 시작한다.
⑤ 등록비는 환불이 가능하다.
2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지 1
제 3 교시 홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2 홀수형
2 8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 재킷을 고르시오.
Blackhills Hiking Jackets
Model Price Pockets Waterproof Color
① A $ 40 3 ☓ brown
② B $ 55 4 ○ blue
③ C $ 65 5 ○ yellow
④ D $ 70 6 ☓ gray
⑤ E $ 85 6 ○ black
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I agree. The place was too crowded.
② Of course. It’s very warm downtown.
③ All right. Let’s go on a bus tour then.
④ Sure. Our last vacation was the best ever.
⑤ Yes. The hotel is within walking distance.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Thanks for understanding. I hope it won’t cause any trouble.
② Certainly. I was deeply touched when you sent the message.
③ Good news. The orchestra is still looking for new members.
④ You’re welcome. I did what I had to do for the orientation.
⑤ That’s right. I couldn’t have won the election without you.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, David가 Julia에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
David:
① We need to check what we did last year.
② Why don’t we cancel the program this year?
③ Let me assign this work to the other teachers.
④ How about joining the program after school?
⑤ Let’s ask the students what they prefer to do.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① relationship between music and civilization
② materials used to make musical instruments
③ trends in modern art around the world
④ ways to preserve ancient instruments
⑤ use of music for rest and relaxation
17. 언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① China ② Mongolia ③ Nigeria
④ Australia ⑤ Colombia
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 단체 관람 시 유의 사항을 안내하려고
② 교내 행사에 초청할 강사 추천을 부탁하려고
③ 프로그램 단체 예약이 가능한지를 문의하려고
④ 새로운 체험 학습 프로그램을 소개하려고
⑤ 견학 예정 인원수의 변경을 요청하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
The start of the boat tour was far from what I had expected.
None of the wildlife I saw was exotic. I could only see dull
gray rocks. It was also so hot and humid that I could not
enjoy the tour fully. However, as the boat slid into the Bay
Park Canal, all of a sudden my mother shouted, “Look at the
mangroves!” A whole new world came into sight. The
mangrove forest alongside the canal thrilled me as we entered
its cool shade. I was fascinated by the beautiful leaves and
flowers of the mangroves. But best of all, I was charmed by
the native birds, monkeys, and lizards moving among the
branches. “What a wonderful adventure!” I exclaimed.
* mangrove: 맹그로브(강가나 늪지에서 자라는 열대 나무)
① ashamed → relaxed ② disappointed → excited
③ delighted → confused ④ pleased → lonely
⑤ scared → relieved
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
At the 2015 Fortune Most Powerful Women Summit, Ginni
Rometty offered this advice: “When did you ever learn the
most in your life? What experience? I guarantee you’ll tell
me it was a time you felt at risk.” To become a better leader,
you have to step out of your comfort zone. You have to
challenge the conventional ways of doing things and search for
opportunities to innovate. Exercising leadership not only
requires you to challenge the organizational status quo but
also requires you to challenge your internal status quo. You
have to challenge yourself. You have to venture beyond the
boundaries of your current experience and explore new
territory. Those are the places where there are opportunities to
improve, innovate, experiment, and grow. Growth is always
at the edges, just outside the boundaries of where you are
right now.
* status quo: 현재 상태
① 지도자는 실현 가능한 목표를 설정해야 한다.
② 지도자는 새로운 제도를 적극적으로 도입해야 한다.
③ 지도자는 조직의 현재 상태를 철저히 분석해야 한다.
④ 지도자는 현재의 자신을 넘어서는 도전을 해야 한다.
⑤ 지도자는 기존의 방식과 새로운 방식을 조화시켜야 한다.
 이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Dear Ms. Diane Edwards,
 I am a teacher working at East End High School. I
have read from your notice that the East End Seaport
Museum is now offering a special program, the 2017
Bug Lighthouse Experience. The program would be a
great opportunity for our students to have fun and
experience something new. I estimate that 50 students
and teachers from our school would like to participate
in it. Would you please let me know if it is possible to
make a group reservation for the program for Saturday,
November 18? We don’t want to miss this great
opportunity. I look forward to hearing from you soon.
Best regards,
Joseph Loach
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 3
3 8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One exercise in teamwork I do at a company retreat is to
put the group in a circle. At one particular retreat, there were
eight people in the circle, and I slowly handed tennis balls to
one person to start throwing around the circle. If N equals the
number of people in the circle, then the maximum number of
balls you can have in motion is N minus 1. Why? Because it’s
almost impossible to throw and catch at the same time. The
purpose of the exercise is to demonstrate the importance of an
individual’s action. People are much more concerned about
catching the ball than throwing it. What this demonstrates is
that it’s equally important to the success of the exercise that
the person you’re throwing to catches the ball as that you are
able to catch the ball. If you’re less concerned about how you
deliver information than with how you receive it, you’ll
ultimately fail at delegation. You have to be equally skilled at
both.
* delegation: 위임
① 구성원 간의 공통된 목표 의식이 협업의 필수 조건이다.
② 정확한 정보 이해는 신속한 업무 수행을 가능하게 한다.
③ 자유로운 의사소통 문화는 직무 만족도 향상에 기여한다.
④ 여가 활동을 함께하는 것도 협업의 효율성을 증가시킨다.
⑤ 협업에서는 정보를 전달하는 방식에도 능숙할 필요가 있다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sensory-specific satiety is defined as a decrease in appetite,
or the subjective liking for the food that is consumed, with
little change in the hedonics of uneaten food. As a result of
sensory-specific satiety, when people consume a variety of
foods, they tend to overeat. A greater variety of food leads
people to eat more than they would otherwise. So, being full
and feeling sated are separate matters. The recovery of
appetite or the motivation to eat is apparent to anyone who
has consumed a large meal and is quite full, and does not
require additional energy or nutrients to meet their daily
needs, but decides to consume additional calories after seeing
the dessert cart. Small changes in the sensory properties of
foods are sufficient to increase food intake. For example,
subjects who were presented with different shapes of pasta
showed increased hedonic ratings and increased energy
consumption relative to subjects eating only a single shape of
pasta.
* satiety: 포만(감) ** hedonics: 쾌락 *** sated: 충분히 만족한
① necessity of consuming a varied diet in daily life
② reasons for people’s rejection of unfamiliar foods
③ changes in people’s preference for basic food items
④ impact of food variety on the amount of food people consume
⑤ importance of maintaining food diversity to prevent overeating
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Individual authors and photographers have rights to their
intellectual property during their lifetimes, and their heirs
have rights for 70 years after the creator’s death, so any
publication less than 125 years old has to be checked for its
copyright status. The duration of copyright protection has
increased steadily over the years; the life-plus-70-years
standard was set by the Copyright Term Extension Act of
1998, which increased the 50-year limit established by the
1976 Copyright Act. Supporters of such legislation like to
defend these increases with tales of starving writers and their
impoverished descendants, but in reality the beneficiaries are
more likely to be transnational publishing companies. And
note that copyright laws serve a dual purpose. In addition to
protecting the rights of authors so as to encourage the
publication of new creative works, copyright is also supposed
to place reasonable time limits on those rights so that
outdated works may be incorporated into new creative efforts.
Therefore, the extended copyright protection frustrates new
creative endeavors such as including poetry and song lyrics
on Internet sites.
* heir: 상속인 ** legislation: 법률, 입법
① The Untold Origin of Copyright Protection
② Creativity Leaps with Longer Copyright Protection!
③ More Is Not Enough: No Limits to Copyright Coverage
④ Who Smiles at Copyright Protection, Writers or Publishers?
⑤ Does Extended Copyright Truly Enhance Protection and Creation?
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the sales of four types of ethical
produce in the UK in 2010 and 2015. ① In 2015, the sales of
each of the four types of ethical produce showed an increase
from the sales of its corresponding type in 2010. ② Among
the four types of ethical produce, the sales of Organic ranked
the highest in 2010 but ranked the second highest in 2015.
③ Among the four types of ethical produce, Rainforest
Alliance recorded the second highest sales in 2010 and
recorded the highest sales in 2015. ④ The sales of Fairtrade
in 2015 were twice as high as those in 2010. ⑤ In both 2010
and 2015, the sales of Vegetarian meat alternatives were the
lowest among the four types of ethical produce.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4 홀수형
4 8
25. Jim Marshall에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The late photographer Jim Marshall is regarded as one of
the most celebrated photographers of the 20th century. He
holds the distinction of being the first and only photographer
to be presented with the Grammy Trustees Award. He started
as a professional photographer in 1959. He was given
unrivaled access to rock’s biggest artists, including the
Rolling Stones, Bob Dylan, and Ray Charles. He was the only
photographer granted backstage access for the Beatles’ final
full concert and also shot the Rolling Stones on their historic
1972 tour. He formed special bonds with the artists he worked
with and those relationships helped him capture some of his
most vivid and iconic imagery. Over a 50-year career, the
photographs he took appeared on more than 500 album
covers. He was passionate about his work up until the end. “I
have no kids,” he used to say. “My photographs are my
children.”
① Grammy Trustees Award가 수여된 최초이자 유일한 사진작가이다.
② 1959년에 직업 사진작가로 일하기 시작했다.
③ Rolling Stones의 역사적인 1972년 투어에서 그들을 촬영했다.
④ 함께 작업한 예술가들과 특별한 유대 관계를 맺지 않았다.
⑤ 500개가 넘는 앨범 커버에 그가 촬영한 사진들이 실렸다.
26. 2018 CVL Volleyball Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 고등학생을 대상으로 한다.
② 참가자들은 수준에 따라 훈련을 받을 것이다.
③ 오전에 연습 경기를 실시한다.
④ 참가자들은 배구공과 캠프 티셔츠를 받을 것이다.
⑤ 마지막 날에 대학 배구 선수들이 방문할 것이다.
27. Eugene Community Charity Fun Hike에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 올해의 기부금 전액은 어린이 도서관 공사비로 사용된다.
② 안전 교육은 오전 10시에 시작한다.
③ 각 참가자는 두 개의 코스를 선택할 수 있다.
④ 점심 식사가 제공된다.
⑤ 하이킹을 완료한 참가자들은 메달을 받을 것이다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Psychologists who study giving behavior ① have noticed
that some people give substantial amounts to one or two
charities, while others give small amounts to many charities.
Those who donate to one or two charities seek evidence about
what the charity is doing and ② what it is really having a
positive impact. If the evidence indicates that the charity is
really helping others, they make a substantial donation. Those
who give small amounts to many charities are not so
interested in whether what they are ③ doing helps others ─
psychologists call them warm glow givers. Knowing that they
are giving makes ④ them feel good, regardless of the impact
of their donation. In many cases the donation is so small ─
$10 or less ─ that if they stopped ⑤ to think, they would
realize that the cost of processing the donation is likely to
exceed any benefit it brings to the charity.
2018 CVL Volleyball Camp
The College Volleyball League (CVL) is hosting a camp
for high school students from January 23 to 27.
Training Program
After a brief skills test, participants will be trained
based on their levels.
∙Basic Level: serving, tossing, and spiking
∙Advanced Level: individual plays and team strategies
Daily Schedule
∙9 a.m.－11 a.m.: one-on-one skills training
∙1 p.m.－4 p.m.: practice game sessions
Note
∙Participation fee is $100.
∙Participants will receive a volleyball and a camp T-shirt.
∙College volleyball players will visit to offer advice to
participants on the final day of the camp.
For more information, visit our website at www.CVL.org.
All donations this year go toward purchasing
new books for the children’s library!
∙Date: Saturday, December 2, 2017
∙Place: Peterson National Park
∙Registration & Safety Instruction: 9:00 a.m.－9:30 a.m.
∙Start Time: 10:00 a.m.
How to Participate
∙Each participant should set a goal for donation by
choosing only one of the following courses:
 － Course A: 2 miles ($20)
 － Course B: 3 miles ($30)
 － Course C: 5 miles ($50 or more)
∙Participants should make their donations before the start.
What to Bring
∙Participants should bring comfortable shoes and
sunscreen.
∙Lunch is not provided, so please bring your own
refreshments.
Participants who complete their hike will receive a
medal. For more information, please call 234-567-1234.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 5
5 8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
Some prominent journalists say that archaeologists should
work with treasure hunters because treasure hunters have
accumulated valuable historical artifacts that can reveal
much about the past. But archaeologists are not asked to
cooperate with tomb robbers, who also have valuable
historical artifacts. The quest for profit and the search for
knowledge cannot coexist in archaeology because of the
① time factor. Rather incredibly, one archaeologist employed
by a treasure hunting firm said that as long as archaeologists
are given six months to study shipwrecked artifacts before
they are sold, no historical knowledge is ② found! On the
contrary, archaeologists and assistants from the INA (Institute
of Nautical Archaeology) needed more than a decade of
year-round conservation before they could even ③ catalog all
the finds from an eleventh-century AD wreck they had
excavated. Then, to interpret those finds, they had to ④ learn
Russian, Bulgarian, and Romanian, without which they would
never have learned the true nature of the site. Could
a “commercial archaeologist” have ⑤ waited more than a
decade or so before selling the finds?
* prominent: 저명한 ** excavate: 발굴하다
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Scott Adams, the creator of Dilbert, one of the most
successful comic strips of all time, says that two personal
letters dramatically changed his life. One night ① he was
watching a PBS-TV program about cartooning, when he
decided to write to the host of the show, Jack Cassady, to ask
for his advice about becoming a cartoonist. Much to ② his
surprise, he heard back from Cassady within a few weeks in
the form of a handwritten letter. The letter advised Adams not
to be discouraged if he received early rejections. Adams got
inspired and submitted some cartoons, but ③ he was quickly
rejected. Not following Cassady’s advice, ④ he became
discouraged, put his materials away, and decided to forget
cartooning as a career. About fifteen months later, he was
surprised to receive yet another letter from Cassady,
especially since he hadn’t thanked ⑤ him for his original
advice. He acted again on Cassady’s encouragement, but this
time he stuck with it and obviously hit it big.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Apocalypse Now, a film produced and directed by Francis
Ford Coppola, gained widespread popularity, and for good
reason. The film is an adaptation of Joseph Conrad’s novel
Heart of Darkness, which is set in the African Congo at the
end of the 19th century. Unlike the original novel, Apocalypse
Now is set in Vietnam and Cambodia during the Vietnam War.
The setting, time period, dialogue and other incidental details
are changed but the fundamental narrative and themes of
Apocalypse Now are the same as those of Heart of Darkness.
Both describe a physical journey, reflecting the central
character’s mental and spiritual journey, down a river to
confront the deranged Kurtz character, who represents the
worst aspects of civilisation. By giving Apocalypse Now a
setting that was contemporary at the time of its release,
audiences were able to experience and identify with its
themes more easily than they would have if the film had been
 . [3점]
* deranged: 제정신이 아닌
① a literal adaptation of the novel
② a source of inspiration for the novel
③ a faithful depiction of the Vietnam War
④ a vivid dramatisation of a psychological journey
⑤ a critical interpretation of contemporary civilisation
32. How many of the lunches that you ate over the last week
can you recall? Do you remember what you ate today? I hope
so. Yesterday? I bet it takes a moment’s effort. And what
about the day before yesterday? What about a week ago? It’s
not so much that your memory of last week’s lunch has
disappeared; if provided with the right cue, like where you
ate it, or whom you ate it with, you would likely recall what
had been on your plate. Rather, it’s difficult to remember last
week’s lunch because your brain has filed it away with all
the other lunches you’ve ever eaten as just another lunch.
When we try to recall something from a category that
includes as many instances as “lunch” or “wine,” many
memories compete for our attention. The memory of last
Wednesday’s lunch isn’t necessarily gone; it’s that you lack
 . But
a wine that talks: That’s unique. It’s a memory without rivals.
[3점]
① the channel to let it flow into the pool of ordinary memories
② the right hook to pull it out of a sea of lunchtime memories
③ the glue to attach it to just another lunch memory
④ the memory capacity to keep a box of sleeping memories
⑤ the sufficient number of competitors in a battle for attention
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6 홀수형
6 8
33. In the less developed world, the percentage of the
population involved in agriculture is declining, but at the
same time, those remaining in agriculture are not benefiting
from technological advances. The typical scenario in the less
developed world is one in which a very few commercial
agriculturalists are technologically advanced while the vast
majority are incapable of competing. Indeed, this vast majority
 because
of larger global causes. As an example, in Kenya, farmers are
actively encouraged to grow export crops such as tea and
coffee at the expense of basic food production. The result is
that a staple crop, such as maize, is not being produced in a
sufficient amount. The essential argument here is that the
capitalist mode of production is affecting peasant production
in the less developed world in such a way as to limit the
production of staple foods, thus causing a food problem. [3점]
* staple: 주요한 ** maize: 옥수수 *** peasant: 소농(小農)
① have lost control over their own production
② have turned to technology for food production
③ have challenged the capitalist mode of production
④ have reduced their involvement in growing cash crops
⑤ have regained their competitiveness in the world market
34. Over the past 60 years, as mechanical processes have
replicated behaviors and talents we thought were unique to
humans, we’ve had to change our minds about what sets
us apart. As we invent more species of AI, we will be
forced to surrender more of what is supposedly unique
about humans. Each step of surrender ─ we are not the only
mind that can play chess, fly a plane, make music, or invent
a mathematical law ─ will be painful and sad. We’ll spend
the next three decades ─ indeed, perhaps the next century ─
in a permanent identity crisis, continually asking ourselves
what humans are good for. If we aren’t unique toolmakers,
or artists, or moral ethicists, then what, if anything, makes
us special? In the grandest irony of all, the greatest benefit
of an everyday, utilitarian AI will not be increased
productivity or an economics of abundance or a new way of
doing science ─ although all those will happen. The
greatest benefit of the arrival of artificial intelligence is that
 . [3점]
* replicate: 복제하다
① AIs will help define humanity
② humans could also be like AIs
③ humans will be liberated from hard labor
④ AIs could lead us in resolving moral dilemmas
⑤ AIs could compensate for a decline in human intelligence
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
In the context of SNS, media literacy has been argued to
be especially important “in order to make the users aware
of their rights when using SNS tools, and also help them
acquire or reinforce human rights values and develop the
behaviour necessary to respect other people’s rights and
freedoms”. ① With regard to peer-to-peer risks such as
bullying, this last element is of particular importance. ② This
relates to a basic principle that children are taught in the
offline world as well: ‘do not do to others what you would
not want others to do to you’. ③ Children’s SNS activities
should be encouraged when we help them accumulate
knowledge. ④ This should also be a golden rule with regard
to SNS, but for children and young people it is much more
difficult to estimate the consequences and potential serious
impact of their actions in this environment. ⑤ Hence, raising
awareness of children from a very early age about the
particular characteristics of SNS and the potential long-term
impact of a seemingly trivial act is crucial.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Most consumer magazines depend on subscriptions and
advertising. Subscriptions account for almost 90 percent
of total magazine circulation. Single-copy, or newsstand,
sales account for the rest.
(A) For example, the Columbia Journalism Review is
marketed toward professional journalists and its few
advertisements are news organizations, book publishers,
and others. A few magazines, like Consumer Reports,
work toward objectivity and therefore contain no
advertising.
(B) However, single-copy sales are important: they bring in
more revenue per magazine, because subscription prices
are typically at least 50 percent less than the price of
buying single issues.
(C) Further, potential readers explore a new magazine by
buying a single issue; all those insert cards with
subscription offers are included in magazines to
encourage you to subscribe. Some magazines are
distributed only by subscription. Professional or trade
magazines are specialized magazines and are often
published by professional associations. They usually
feature highly targeted advertising.
* revenue: 수입
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형 7
7 8
37.
To modern man disease is a biological phenomenon that
concerns him only as an individual and has no moral
implications. When he contracts influenza, he never
attributes this event to his behavior toward the tax
collector or his mother-in-law.
(A) Sometimes they may not strike the guilty person himself,
but rather one of his relatives or tribesmen, to whom
responsibility is extended. Disease, action that might
produce disease, and recovery from disease are,
therefore, of vital concern to the whole primitive
community.
(B) Disease, as a sanction against social misbehavior,
becomes one of the most important pillars of order in
such societies. It takes over, in many cases, the role
played by policemen, judges, and priests in modern
society.
(C) Among primitives, because of their supernaturalistic
theories, the prevailing moral point of view gives a
deeper meaning to disease. The gods who send disease
are usually angered by the moral offences of the
individual. [3점]
* sanction: 제재
① (A) － (C) － (B) ② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) ④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Experiments show that rats display an immediate liking
for salt the first time they experience a salt deficiency.
Both humans and rats have evolved taste preferences for
sweet foods, which provide rich sources of calories. A study
of food preferences among the Hadza hunter-gatherers of
Tanzania found that honey was the most highly preferred food
item, an item that has the highest caloric value. ( ① ) Human
newborn infants also show a strong preference for sweet
liquids. ( ② ) Both humans and rats dislike bitter and sour
foods, which tend to contain toxins. ( ③ ) They also
adaptively adjust their eating behavior in response to deficits
in water, calories, and salt. ( ④ ) They likewise increase
their intake of sweets and water when their energy and fluids
become depleted. ( ⑤ ) These appear to be specific evolved
mechanisms, designed to deal with the adaptive problem of
food selection, and coordinate consumption patterns with
physical needs.
* deficiency: 결핍 ** deplete: 고갈시키다
39.
It is postulated that such contamination may result from
airborne transport from remote power plants or municipal
incinerators.
An incident in Japan in the 1950s alerted the world to the
potential problems of organic mercury in fish. Factories were
discharging mercury into the waters of Minamata Bay, which
also harbored a commercial fishing industry. Mercury was being
bioaccumulated in the fish tissue and severe mercury poisoning
occurred in many people who consumed the fish. ( ① ) The
disabling neurological symptoms were subsequently called
Minamata disease. ( ② ) Control over direct discharge of
mercury from industrial operations is clearly needed for
prevention. ( ③ ) However, it is now recognized that traces of
mercury can appear in lakes far removed from any such
industrial discharge. ( ④ ) Strictly controlled emission standards
for such sources are needed to minimize this problem. ( ⑤ )
Fish advisories have been issued for many lakes in the United
States; these recommend limits on the number of times per
month particular species of fish should be consumed.
* postulate: 가정하다 ** incinerator: 소각로
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Time spent on on-line interaction with members of one’s
own, preselected community leaves less time available for
actual encounters with a wide variety of people. If physicists,
for example, were to concentrate on exchanging email and
electronic preprints with other physicists around the world
working in the same specialized subject area, they would
likely devote less time, and be less receptive to new ways of
looking at the world. Facilitating the voluntary construction
of highly homogeneous social networks of scientific
communication therefore allows individuals to filter the
potentially overwhelming flow of information. But the
result may be the tendency to overfilter it, thus eliminating
the diversity of the knowledge circulating and diminishing
the frequency of radically new ideas. In this regard, even a
journey through the stacks of a real library can be more
fruitful than a trip through today’s distributed virtual
archives, because it seems difficult to use the available
“search engines” to emulate efficiently the mixture of
predictable and surprising discoveries that typically result
from a physical shelf-search of an extensive library collection.
* homogeneous: 동종의 ** emulate: 따라 하다
󰀻
Focusing on on-line interaction with people who are
engaged in the same specialized area can (A)
potential sources of information and thus make it less
probable for (B) findings to happen.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① limit ……unexpected ② limit ……distorted
③ diversify ……misleading ④ diversify ……accidental
⑤ provide ……novel
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8 홀수형
8 8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
In one sense, every character you create will be yourself.
You’ve never murdered, but your murderer’s rage will be
drawn from memories of your own extreme anger. Your love
scenes will contain hints of your own past kisses and sweet
moments. That scene in which your octogenarian feels
humiliated will draw on your experience of humiliation in
the eighth grade, even though the circumstances are totally
different and you’re not even consciously thinking about
your middle-school years. Our characters’ emotions, after
all, draw on our own emotions. Sometimes, however, you
will want to use your life more directly in your fiction,
dramatizing actual incidents. Charles Dickens used his
desperate experience as a child laborer in Victorian England
to write David Copperfield. Should you create a protagonist
based directly on yourself? The problem with this ─ and it
is a very large problem ─ is that almost no one can view
himself on the page. As the writer, you’re too
close to your own complicated makeup. It can thus be easier
and more effective to use a situation or incident from your
life but make it happen to a character who is not you. In fact,
that’s what authors largely have done. You can still, of
course, incorporate aspects of yourself: your love of
Beethoven, your quick temper, your soccer injuries. But by
applying your own experience to a different protagonist, you
can take advantage of your insider knowledge of the
situation, and yet gain an objectivity and control that the
original intense situation, by definition, did not have.
* octogenarian: 80대의 사람 ** protagonist: 주인공
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Simplicity: The Essence of Great Novels
② Protagonists: A Key to Understanding Novels
③ Keep Your Memories Away from Novel Writing!
④ Character Traits Borrowed from People You Know
⑤ A Better Way to Use Yourself in Character Creation
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① objectively ② intuitively ③ devotedly
④ emotionally ⑤ favorably
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
It was the first day of the new semester. Steve and Dave
were excited that they would be back at school again. They
rode their bicycles to school together that morning, as they
usually did. Dave had math on the first floor, and Steve was
on the second with history. On his way to the classroom,
Steve’s teacher came up to him to ask if (a) he wanted to run
for student president. Steve thought for a moment and
answered, “Sure, it’ll be a great experience.”
(B)
Steve won the election. Upon hearing the result, Dave went
over to Steve and congratulated (b) him, shaking his hand.
Steve could still see the disappointment burning in his eyes. It
wasn’t until later that evening, on the way home, that Dave
said apologetically, “I’m so sorry, Steve! This election hasn’t
damaged our friendship, has it?” “Of course not, Dave. We’re
friends as always!” Steve responded with a smile. As Steve
arrived home, his dad was proudly waiting for him and said,
“Congratulations on the win! How did Dave take it?” Steve
replied, “We’re fine now, best friends for life!” (c) His dad
laughed, “Sounds like you won two battles today!”
(C)
After class, Steve spotted Dave in the hallway and ran to him
excitedly, “I’ve got good news! I’m going for student president
and I think mine will be the only nomination.” Dave cleared his
throat and replied with surprise, “Actually, I’ve just registered
my name, too!” (d) He continued sharply, “Well, best of luck!
But don’t think you’ll win the election, Steve.” Dave walked
quickly away and from that moment on, there was an
uncomfortable air of tension between the two friends. Steve
tried to be friendly toward Dave, but he just didn’t seem to care.
(D)
When the election day came, Steve found that his bicycle
had a flat tire, so he started to run to school. Just as he
reached the end of the street, Dave’s dad, who was driving
Dave to school, pulled over to give him a ride. The dead
silence in the car made the drive painful. Noticing the bad
atmosphere, Dave’s dad said, “You know, only one of you
can win. You have known each other since birth. Don’t let
this election ruin your friendship. Try to be happy for each
other!” His words hit Dave hard. Looking at Steve, Dave felt
the need to apologize to (e) him later that day.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) ④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 개학 날 아침에 Steve와 Dave는 함께 등교했다.
② Steve는 학생회장으로 당선되었다.
③ Steve는 Dave에게 선거 출마 사실을 숨겼다.
④ Dave의 아버지는 학교로 뛰어가던 Steve를 차에 태워 주었다.
⑤ Dave의 아버지는 선거로 인해 우정을 잃지 말라고 충고했다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.